Friends Deborah Bishop, Rita Phipps, and Lora Mae Hollingsway are just about to take a group of children on a riverboat outing when they receive a message from Addie Ross informing them that she has run off with one of their husbands, but leaves them in suspense as to which one. In flashbacks, each woman considers reasons why it might be her husband. 
The first flashback involves Deborah, who grew up on a farm. Her first experience with the outside world came when she joined the Navy WAVES during World War II, where she met her future husband, upper-crusty Brad. When they return to civilian life, Deborah is ill at ease in Brad's social circle. Adding to her insecurity, she learns that everyone expected Brad to marry Addie, whom all three husbands seem to fawn over.
Deborah is comforted by Brad's friend Rita, who writes stories for radio soap operas. Her husband, George, is an English teacher. While Rita wishes George were more ambitious, he is disappointed that his wife caters to her boss, Mrs. Manleigh. Rita is so intent on pleasing Mrs. Manleigh that she forgets her husband's birthday and invites the Manleighs for dinner. George forgives Rita's mistake but, to George's delight, a birthday gift of a rare Brahms recording arrives from Addie. 
Lora Mae grew up in poverty. She pursues Porter, the older, divorced, owner of a statewide chain of department stores where she works. Matters come to a head when Lora Mae sees a picture of Addie on the piano in Porter's mansion. She tells him she wants her picture on a piano: her own piano in her own home. He tells her he isn't interested in marriage and she breaks things off. However, he proposes to Lora Mae and skips a party at Addie's house.
Back in real time, the women return from the outing. Rita is overjoyed to find George at home after attending a play rehearsal. They work things out and she vows not to let herself be pushed around by Mrs. Manleigh.
Porter is late coming home, causing Lora Mae to think he has gone off with Addie. When he shows up and hears his wife's suspicions, he accuses her of being happy at the thought of getting grounds to divorce him and a big chunk of his fortune.
A domestic worker gives Deborah the message that Brad will not be coming home that night. Heartbroken at her perceived loss, she goes alone to the country club dance with the two other couples.
When Porter complains about Lorna Mae dancing with another man, Deborah tells him he has no idea how much she really loves him; still, Porter is certain Lora Mae only sees him as a "cash register." Unable to take the strain anymore, Deborah gets up to leave, announcing that Brad has run off with Addie. Porter stops her, confessing it was he who started to run away with Addie, but had changed his mind. As Deborah leaves to find her late-working husband, Porter tells Lora Mae that admitting his intended abandonment in front of witnesses is enough for her to divorce him and get everything she wants. To his shock, she parries it off by saying she did not hear a word he said. Finally convinced of her love, Porter is overjoyed, and asks her to dance.
The voice of the still unseen Addie Ross then bids all a rueful good night.