In 1944 during World War II, a drunken and guilt-ridden Vernon Waters, a master sergeant in a company of Black soldiers, shouts, "No matter what you do, they still hate you!" Moments later, he is shot to death with a .45 caliber pistol outside Fort Neal, a segregated Army base in Louisiana. Captain Richard Davenport, a Black officer from the Judge Advocate General's Corps, is sent to investigate, against the wishes of commanding officer Colonel Nivens. Most assume Waters was killed by the local Ku Klux Klan, but others are doubtful.
Nivens gives Davenport three days to conduct his investigation. Even Captain Taylor, the only white officer who wants the Sergeant's killers prosecuted, is uncooperative and patronizing, fearing a Black officer will have little success. While some Black soldiers are proud to see one of their own wearing captain's bars, others are distrustful and evasive. Davenport soon learns, though, that whenever the Klan murders Black soldiers, they always strip them naked, whereas the body of Sgt. Waters was found still wearing his uniform.
Davenport learns that Waters' company was officially part of the 221st Chemical Smoke Generator Battalion. Though eager to serve their country in combat, they are kept on the Home Front and assigned menial jobs. Most are former players from the Negro baseball league, grouped as a unit to play ball with Waters as manager. Their success against white soldiers gives them a good deal of popularity, with talk of an exhibition game against the New York Yankees.
James Wilkie, a former sergeant Waters busted for being drunk on duty, describes Waters as a combat veteran who was awarded with the Croix de Guerre by the Third French Republic during the First World War. He also describes Waters as a strict disciplinarian, but also a fair, good-natured NCO who got on well with his men, especially baseball pitcher and Jazz musician C.J. Memphis.
Private Peterson reveals Waters' tyrannical nature and his disgust with Black soldiers from the rural South who lacked education or who spoke in Gullah dialect. Peterson also recalls how he stood up to Waters when he berated the men after a winning game. Waters challenged Peterson to a fistfight, threw sand into his eyes, and beat Peterson up very badly. Interviewing other soldiers, Davenport learns that Waters charged C.J. with the murder of a white MP, after a search conducted by Wilkie turned up a recently discharged pistol under C.J.'s bunk. Waters provoked C.J. into striking him and while the murder charge was dismissed, C.J. was charged with striking a superior officer.
Davenport next interrogates C.J.'s best friend Corporal Bernard Cobb as a murder suspect. Cobb recalls visiting him in the brig, where C.J. told Cobb of a visit from Waters, who smugly admitted the planted gun was part of a frame-up he had done many times before. Sgt. Waters viewed "Geechees", as he termed uneducated, subservient, and unintelligent southern Blacks like C.J., as an obstacle to racial equality and the success of the future African American upper class, and who needed to be removed at all costs. Davenport also learns from Cobb that C.J. had always suffered from claustrophobia and hanged himself while awaiting his court-martial. In protest, the baseball team deliberately threw the season's last game, and Waters was left shattered by the suicide. Taylor disbanded the team, and the players were reassigned to the 221st.
Davenport learns that racist white officers Captain Wilcox and Lieutenant Byrd had an altercation with Waters shortly before his death. Both officers admit to physically assaulting a guilt-ridden Waters after he confronted them in a drunken tirade. They admit that they would have killed him, but only men on guard duty are issued .45 ammunition when the unit is on bivouac. Both officers also claim to have turned their side-arms in immediately after learning of Sgt. Waters' murder, and that ballistics testing has already cleared them. Captain Taylor insists Wilcox and Byrd are murderers, but Davenport disagrees and releases them.
Davenport interrogates Wilkie, who admits he planted the gun under C.J.'s bunk on Waters' orders. Waters had also revealed to Wilkie the real reasons for his hatred of Gullah-speaking Southern Blacks like C.J. While serving with the AEF in France during World War I, a Black soldier in Waters' unit had, at the urging of racist White Doughboys, humiliated them all by dressing up and acting like a monkey in front of the French girls at a cabaret called the "Cafe Napoleon". Previously, white French women had been willing to dance with Black Doughboys and go out with them on dates. In retaliation, Waters, who had always viewed the case as proof of how much damage an ignorant Black man could do, and his enraged fellow Black Doughboys had slit the soldier's throat. 
Davenport demands to know why Waters did not also frame Peterson after their fight. Wilkie explains that Waters liked and respected Peterson; as he spoke proper English and stood up for himself. Davenport has Wilkie arrested just as an impromptu celebration begins, as the 221st is about to be shipped out to join the fight overseas.
Realizing Peterson and Smalls were on guard duty the night of Waters' murder, and thus had been issued .45 ammunition for their pistols, Davenport interrogates Smalls, who was brought back by the MPs. Smalls confesses to watching as Peterson fatally shot Sgt. Waters, claiming it was "justice", both for C.J. and for all Black people. Captured and brought to the interrogation room, Peterson, who incorrectly viewed Waters as a self-hating Black man, smugly says, "I didn't kill much. Some things need getting rid of”. Captain Davenport, implying that Peterson, despite his differing criteria, is no different from Sgt. Waters, coldly retorts, “Who gave you the right to judge who is fit to be a Negro?”
Taylor congratulates Davenport on the arrests of Wilkie, Peterson, and Smalls, admitting that he will have to get used to Negroes being commissioned officers. Davenport replies, "You will have to get used to it. You can bet your ass on that". Meanwhile, the platoon marches in preparation for their deployment to the European theatre.
