Early in World War I, Professor Kantorek gives an impassioned speech to his male German students about the glory of defending the fatherland. On the brink of becoming men, the boys, led by Paul Bäumer, are moved to enlist in the army as part of the new 2nd Company. Their romantic delusions are quickly broken during their brief but rigorous training under the abusive Seargeant Himmelstoss.
The new soldiers arrive at the chaotic combat zone, where they find themselves under attack by artillery even before they reach their post. Their unit is composed of older, unwelcoming veterans, and, having not eaten since morning, they pay Corporal "Kat" Katzinsky for a meal of stolen hog with their tobacco, alcohol, and soap.
The boys' first mission with the veterans is a harrowing experience, during which one of them is killed. Another dies after—his nerves frayed following several days of consistent bombardment—he frantically tries to escape from the trenches. There are heavy losses on both sides, but no ground gained, after the boys' first major battle, and when 2nd Company is sent back to the field kitchens for a breather and a meal, each man receives double helpings, simply because of the number of dead. After eating, they begin a semi-serious discussion about the causes of this war, and of wars in general.
One day, Himmelstoss arrives at the front, where he is spurned because of his bad reputation. He is forced to go over the top with the 2nd Company and is promptly killed after showing himself to be a coward. Paul stabs a French soldier and becomes increasingly distraught as he spends the night trapped in a shell-hole with the slowly dying man. He tries and fails to help his enemy, and begs for forgiveness. When he is able, he returns to the German lines, where he is comforted by Kat.
While marching behind the lines, Paul and his good friend Albert Kropp are severely wounded by artillery fire and sent to a Catholic hospital. Paul is taken to the bandaging ward, from which, according to its reputation, nobody has ever returned alive, but he makes a miraculous recovery. His elation is tempered by the depression of Albert, whose leg has to be amputated.
Paul is given a furlough and visits his family at home. He is shocked by how uninformed and optimistic everyone is about the state of the war. When he visits Kantorek's schoolroom, he is asked to share his experiences, and, unexpectedly, expresses hopeless disillusionment with the war to the professor and his young students, who call him a "coward".
Cutting his furlough short, Paul returns to the front to be with people who understand him, only to find 2nd Company filled with new recruits who are even younger than he and his classmates were when they enlisted. The only familiar face is Tjaden, who tells him the fates of several of their comrades. Paul finds Kat, who is on his way back from an unsuccessful search for food, and the friends greet each other warmly and discuss the grim outlook of the war. A bomb dropped by an aircraft falls nearby, breaking Kat's shin, so Paul carries him back to a field hospital, only to find that a second explosion has killed Kat. Crushed by the loss of his mentor, Paul stumbles away while the medics play cards.
Back on the front line, Paul sees a butterfly just outside of his fortification. Smiling, he reaches over the top of the sandbags to try to hold the butterfly and is shot and killed by an enemy sniper. Superimposed over the image of a veterans cemetery, Paul and his classmates are seen arriving at the front for the first time.
