Dave, Mike, Cyril, and Moocher are working-class friends living in the university town of Bloomington, Indiana. Now turning 19, they all graduated from high school the year before and are not sure what to do with their lives; attending the university seems unrealistic. They spend much of their time together swimming in an abandoned water-filled limestone quarry. They sometimes clash with the more affluent Indiana University students in their hometown, who refer to them disparagingly as "cutters", referring to locals' common work in the limestone industry. (The term was invented for the film, because the real-world pejorative "stonies" was deemed unusable for its perceived link to marijuana.)Dave is obsessed with competitive bicycle racing, and Italian racers in particular, because he recently won a Masi bicycle. His down-to-earth father Ray, a former stonecutter who now operates his own used car business (sometimes unethically), is puzzled and exasperated by his son's love of Italian music and culture, which Dave associates with cycling. However, his mother Evelyn is more understanding and prepares Italian dishes for the family, to Ray's annoyance.
Dave develops a crush on a university student named Katherine and masquerades as an Italian exchange student to romance her. One evening, he serenades "Caterina" outside her sorority house by singing Friedrich von Flotow's aria "M' Apparì Tutt' Amor", with Cyril providing guitar accompaniment. Her boyfriend Rod and his fraternity brothers beat Cyril up, mistaking him for the suitor. Cyril wants no trouble, but Mike – a former high school football quarterback – insists on tracking down Rod and starting a brawl. The university president (played by real-life president Dr. John W. Ryan) reprimands the students for their arrogance toward the "cutters" and, over the students' objections, invites the town to field a team for the annual Indiana University Little 500 race.When an Italian cycling team comes to town for an exhibition race, Dave is thrilled to compete with them. However, the Italians are annoyed by his challenge to their preordained victory, and force him to crash, which disillusions him. He subsequently confesses his deception to Katherine, who is heartbroken.
Dave's friends persuade him to join them in racing the Little 500. Ray privately tells his son how, when he was a young stonecutter, he was proud to help provide the material to construct the university, yet he never felt welcome on campus. Later, Dave runs into Katherine, who is leaving for a job in Chicago; they patch things up.
Dave is the only skilled cyclist among his friends, so he rides most of the Little 500 without a break, rather than switching riders periodically, like the other teams. Nonetheless, he gains a small lead, but is injured in a crash and comes in for a change. Mike, Cyril, and Moocher each take turns to the best of their ability, but fall farther and farther back. Finally, Dave has them tape his feet to the pedals – which commits him to finish the race himself – and makes up lost ground, overtaking Rod – riding for the favored fraternity team – on the last lap, and winning.
Ray is proud of his son and takes to riding a bicycle himself, for his health. Dave later enrolls at the university, where he meets a pretty French student. Soon, he is extolling to her the virtues of the Tour de France and French cyclists.