Bugsy
In 1941, gangster Benjamin "Bugsy" Siegel, who had partnered in crime since childhood  with Meyer Lansky and Charlie Luciano, goes to Los Angeles and instantly falls in love with Virginia Hill, a tough-talking Hollywood starlet. The two meet for the first time when Bugsy visits actor George Raft on the set of Manpower. He buys a house in Beverly Hills, planning to stay there while his wife and two daughters remain in Scarsdale, New York.
Bugsy is in California to wrestle control of betting parlors away from weak Los Angeles crime family boss Jack Dragna. Ascending local Jewish gangster Mickey Cohen robs Dragna's operation one day. He is confronted by Bugsy, who decides he should be in business with the guy who committed the robbery, not the guy who got robbed. Cohen is put in charge of the betting casinos; Dragna is forced to confess  to a raging Bugsy that he stole $14,000 and is told he now answers to Cohen.
After arguments about Virginia's trysts with drummer Gene Krupa and various bullfighters and Bugsy's reluctance to get a divorce, Virginia makes a romantic move on Bugsy. On a trip to Nevada to make a maintenance call to a rough gambling joint, Bugsy is struck with the inspiration for a luxury hotel and casino in the desert of Nevada, which happens to be in the only state where gambling is legal. He obtains $1 million in funding from Lansky and other New York City mobsters, on the motion of going big, doing it legit in Nevada. Virginia wants no part of it until Bugsy offers her a share, puts her in charge of accounting and begins constructing the Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel Casino in Las Vegas; however, the budget soon soars out of control to $6 million due to his extravagance. Bugsy tries everything to ensure it gets completed, even selling his share of the casino.
Bugsy is visited in Los Angeles by former associate Harry Greenberg, who has betrayed his old associates to save himself and run out of money from a combination of his gambling habits and being extorted by prosecutors who want his testimony. Though he is Harry's trusted friend, Bugsy has no choice but to kill him. He is arrested for the murder, but the only witness is a cab driver who dropped Harry off in front of Bugsy's  house. The driver is paid to leave town.
Lansky waits for Bugsy outside the jail and gives a satchel of money to his friend, though he warns Bugsy that he will no longer be able to protect him. The Flamingo's opening night is a total failure in a rainstorm, and $2 million of the budget is unaccounted for. Bugsy discovers that Virginia stole the money, which he then lets her keep. He then urges Lansky to never sell his share of the casino because he will live to thank him someday.
Later that night, Bugsy is shot and killed in his home. Virginia is told the news in Las Vegas and knows her own days could be numbered.
The end title cards state that one week after Bugsy's death, Virginia returned all of the missing money to Lansky and later committed suicide in Austria, and by 1991, the $6 million invested in Bugsy's Las Vegas dream had generated revenues of $100 billion.