In 1937, a woman posing as Evelyn Mulwray hires private investigator J.J. "Jake" Gittes to trail her husband Hollis under the ruse that she suspects him of infidelity. After Gittes photographs Hollis in the company of a young woman, the pictures appear in the Los Angeles Times with a story exposing their supposed "love nest." Gittes is confronted by the real Evelyn Mulwray, who threatens to sue him after her imposter used him to discredit Hollis, chief engineer at the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power.
Gittes visits a reservoir where he sees his former colleague, LAPD Lieutenant Lou Escobar, as Hollis's dead body is dragged from the water. Evelyn officially hires Gittes to investigate Hollis's death as a homicide. He finds that huge quantities of water are being released from the reservoir every night, despite a drought. He is warned off by Water Department Security Chief Claude Mulvihill and is attacked by his henchman, who deeply cuts Gittes' nose with a switchblade. The next morning, Gittes receives a call from Ida Sessions, the woman who posed as Evelyn Mulwray. She refuses to say who hired her but tells him to check that day's obituaries.
Gittes learns that Hollis once privately owned L.A.'s water supply with his wealthy father-in-law and former business partner, Noah Cross, until a bitter feud. Cross offers to double Gittes' fee if he finds the girl who disappeared after the "love nest" story was published.
Gittes discovers that much of the Northwest Valley has recently changed ownership. He visits an orange grove in the valley, where he is attacked by landowners who believe him to be an agent of the Water Department. He finds the department is sabotaging the water supply to force farmers off their land so it can be bought at a cheap price. He suspects Hollis was murdered when he uncovered the plan.
Some Northwest Valley property was seemingly purchased by a recently deceased retirement-home resident. Jake and Evelyn bluff their way into the home and confirm that other real estate deals were closed in the names of unknowing residents, with one former resident's name appearing in the previous day's obituaries. Their visit is interrupted by the suspicious director, who calls Mulvihill to confront Gittes.
After escaping Mulvihill and his thugs, Jake and Evelyn hide at her house, where they sleep together. Evelyn receives a phone call during the night and leaves. Gittes follows her to a house and sees her comforting the missing girl. A furious Gittes accuses Evelyn of holding the woman hostage, but she claims the woman is her sister, Katherine.
The next day, an anonymous call draws Gittes to Ida's apartment, where he finds her body. Escobar, who is waiting there, tells Gittes he knows that Ida hired him to follow Hollis and accuses him of extorting "hush money" from Evelyn to keep him from revealing that she is the real murderer. He adds that saltwater was found in Hollis's lungs, indicating that he did not drown in the freshwater reservoir. Escobar tells Gittes to produce Evelyn quickly. At the Mulwray mansion, Gittes finds Evelyn gone and the servants packing up the house. He finds a pair of eyeglasses in the saltwater garden pond.
Gittes confronts Evelyn about Katherine, who she now claims is her daughter. Frustrated by her seeming dishonesty, Gittes repeatedly hits her. Evelyn breaks down sobbing and reveals that Katherine is both her sister and her daughter; Cross raped and impregnated her when she was 15. She tells Gittes that the eyeglasses he found in the pond at her mansion are not Hollis's, since he did not wear bifocals.
Gittes arranges for Evelyn and Katherine to flee to Mexico and instructs Evelyn to meet him at her butler's home in Chinatown. He summons Cross to the Mulwray residence to settle their deal. Cross reveals that he plans to incorporate the Northwest Valley into the City of Los Angeles, then irrigate and develop it with funds from a sham ballot measure that L.A. residents are misled to believe will bring them more water. Gittes realizes the bifocals are Cross's and accuses him of murdering Hollis. Cross has Mulvihill retrieve the glasses from Gittes at gunpoint.
Gittes is forced to drive Cross and Mulvihill to Chinatown, where Evelyn awaits. The police are there and detain Gittes. Cross advances on Katherine as she gets into Evelyn's car, identifies himself as her grandfather, and attempts to take her away. Desperate to escape her abusive father, Evelyn shoots him in the arm. The police open fire on Evelyn as she drives away with Katherine, killing her. Cross clutches a screaming Katherine and leads her away, while Escobar orders the traumatized Gittes released. As he is led away by his associates, one of them urges him to "Forget it, Jake, it's Chinatown."
