In 1863, 1st Lieutenant John J. Dunbar—serving with the Union Army—is wounded in battle at St. David's Field in Tennessee. The surgeon intends to amputate Dunbar's leg. Choosing death in battle instead, Dunbar steals a horse and rides out in front of Confederate lines, who repeatedly fire at him and miss. The Union Army takes advantage of the distraction to mount a successful attack. For his bravery, Dunbar is given medical care that saves his leg and is awarded "Cisco", the horse he rode during his suicide attempt, along with his choice of posting. Dunbar requests a transfer to the American frontier so he can see it before it disappears.
Dunbar arrives at Fort Hays where its commander, Major Fambrough, assigns Dunbar to the furthest outpost under his jurisdiction: Fort Sedgwick. Fambrough, who is mentally ill, kills himself as Dunbar departs. Dunbar travels with Timmons, a mule-wagon provisioner, and finds the fort deserted. Dunbar decides to stay and rebuild the fort, enjoying the solitude and recording his observations in his diary. Timmons is killed by a band of Pawnee while returning to Fort Hays. The deaths of both Timmons and Fambrough leave the army unaware of Dunbar's assignment, therefore no other soldiers arrive to reinforce the post.
Dunbar encounters his Sioux neighbors when they attempt to steal his horse and intimidate him. Wanting to make peace, he seeks out the Sioux camp. En route, he comes across Stands with a Fist, a white ethnic Sioux woman who was adopted as a young girl by the tribe's medicine man, Kicking Bird, after her family was killed by Pawnee. She is mutilating herself in mourning for her late Sioux husband. Dunbar brings her back to the Sioux to recover. Though the tribe is initially hostile, Dunbar gradually establishes a rapport with them, particularly Kicking Bird, the warrior Wind in His Hair, and the youth Smiles a Lot. Stands with a Fist acts as an interpreter, speaking Lakota and English. 
Dunbar comes to respect and appreciate the Sioux, their lifestyle, and their culture. He is then accepted into the tribe after he tells them of a migrating herd of buffalo and participates in the hunt. When at Fort Sedgwick, Dunbar befriends a wolf he dubs "Two Socks" for its white forepaws. Observing Dunbar and Two Socks chasing each other, the Sioux give him the name Dances with Wolves. Dunbar learns the Lakota language, forges a romantic relationship with Stands with a Fist, and supplies the tribe with firearms to help defend them from an attack by the rival Pawnee tribe. Dunbar eventually earns Kicking Bird's approval to marry Stands with a Fist, and abandons Fort Sedgwick.
Because of the growing threat of encroaching white settlers, Chief Ten Bears decides to move the tribe to its winter camp. Dunbar decides to accompany them, but must first retrieve his diary from Fort Sedgwick, as he realizes that it would help the U.S. Army locate the tribe. When he arrives, he finds the fort reoccupied by the army. Because of his Sioux clothing, the soldiers open fire, killing Cisco before capturing Dunbar. Two officers interrogate him, but Dunbar cannot prove his story, as one of the soldiers stole his diary. Refusing to help the army hunt down native tribes, Dunbar is charged with desertion and transported back east as a prisoner. Two Socks attempts to follow Dunbar, but is shot dead by the escorting soldiers.
Eventually, the Sioux tracks the convoy, killing the soldiers and freeing Dunbar. At the winter camp, Dunbar decides to leave with Stands with a Fist because his continuing presence would endanger the tribe. As they leave, Dunbar and Kicking Bird exchange parting gifts; Smiles a Lot returns the diary, which he recovered during Dunbar's rescue; Wind in His Hair loudly proclaims his everlasting friendship to Dunbar. 
U.S. troops are seen searching the mountains, but cannot locate Dunbar or the tribe. The epilogue text tells that the last of the free Sioux would eventually surrender at Fort Robinson, Nebraska thirteen years later, rendering their culture to history.
