

Part one
NKVD Lieutenant-General Yevgraf Zhivago searches for the daughter of his half-brother Dr. Yuri Zhivago and Larissa ("Lara") Antipova. Yevgraf believes a young dam worker, Tanya Komarova, may be his niece and explains to her why.
After his mother's burial, the orphaned child Yuri, owning only an inherited balalaika, was taken by family friends Alexander and Anna Gromeko to Moscow. In 1913, Zhivago, now a doctor and poet, becomes engaged to the Gromekos' daughter Tonya after her schooling in Paris.
Meanwhile, 17-year-old Lara is seduced by her mother's much older friend/lover, the well-connected Victor Komarovsky. Lara's friend, the idealistic Pasha Antipov, who wishes to marry her, is wounded by mounted police at a peaceful demonstration. Lara treats Pasha's wound, and hides a gun he picked up.

Discovering Lara's relationship with Komarovsky, her mother attempts suicide. Komarovsky attempts to dissuade Lara from marrying Pasha. She refuses and he rapes her. A traumatised Lara later follows Komarovsky to a party, shoots him in the arm, and is escorted out by Pasha. Pasha marries her, despite now knowing about her relationship with Komarovsky. They leave Moscow.
During World War I, Yuri, now married to Tonya, becomes a battlefield doctor. Pasha joins up, but is reported missing. Lara enlists as a nurse to search for him and encounters Zhivago. For six months, they serve at a field hospital, as unrest grows in Russia after exiled Vladimir Lenin returns. The two fall in love, but Zhivago remains faithful to Tonya.
After Russia leaves the war, Yuri returns to Tonya, their son Sasha and the widowed Alexander Gromeko in their Moscow house, which was confiscated by the Soviet government and now houses many other people. Yevgraf, now a Cheka officer, tells Yuri his poems have been condemned as anti-communist. Yevgraf provides documents so the family can travel to the Gromekos' country home, "Varykino", in the Urals near Yuriatin. Their heavily guarded train travels through contested territory where Bolshevik commander Strelnikov is fighting anti-Communist White forces.

Part two
The train stops near Strelnikov's armored train. Yuri gets out, is captured and taken to Strelnikov, whom Yuri recognizes as Pasha. Strelnikov mentions that Lara lives in Yuriatin, now White-occupied. Strelnikov lets Zhivago return to his train. The family find the main house at Varykino sealed up by the Bolsheviks; they settle into a neighboring cottage. In Yuriatin, Yuri sees Lara, and they begin an affair. When Tonya is about to give birth to a second child, Yuri breaks off with Lara but is forcibly enlisted by Communist partisans.
After two years, Yuri deserts and returns to Yuriatin. Lara says Tonya contacted her while searching for Yuri. Leaving his belongings with Lara, she returned to Moscow. Tonya later sent Lara a sealed letter for Yuri. Tonya had borne a daughter, and she, her father, and two children are living in Paris following deportation.
Yuri and Lara become lovers again but Komarovsky arrives. Cheka agents have been watching them due to Lara's marriage to Strelnikov. Komarovsky offers them help escaping Russia, but they refuse, instead going to Varykino, and hiding in the main house. Yuri begins the "Lara" poems, which will bring him fame but government disapproval. Komarovsky arrives with troops. Recently appointed as a Far Eastern Republic official, he says the Cheka allowed Lara to remain in the area only to lure Strelnikov; he had been captured five miles away, and committed suicide. They now intend to arrest Lara. Komarovsky's offer of safe passage is accepted, but once Lara is on her way, Yuri does not follow. On the train, Lara tells Komarovsky she is pregnant by Yuri.
Years later, Yevgraf finds a Moscow medical job for his now frail half-brother. Yuri sees Lara in the street. He has a fatal heart attack before reaching her. At Yuri's funeral Lara asks Yevgraf for help finding her daughter by Yuri, who vanished during the civil war. Yevgraf helps her search the orphanages, in vain. Lara then disappears and Yevgraf believes she died in a gulag.
Yevgraf believes that Tanya Komarova is Yuri and Lara's daughter; she remains unconvinced. Asked how she became lost, Tanya answers that her "father" (Komarovsky) let go of her hand when they were running from bombardment. Yevgraf responds that a real father would not have let go. Tanya promises to consider Yevgraf's words. Her boyfriend David arrives, and she leaves with him. Yevgraf notices Tanya carries a balalaika. He asks if she can play, and David replies, "She's an artist!", and says she is untrained. Yevgraf responds, "Ah... then it's a gift!"
