When president of Dodsworth Motors, Samuel "Sam" Dodsworth (Walter Huston), a successful, self-made man sells the company he founded 20 years earlier in a small mid-western town, his banker and friend warns Sam that men like them are only happy when they are working. Sam talks of the extended trip to Europe he is taking with his wife Fran (Ruth Chatterton), who feels trapped by their dull social life.
While travelling on the RMS Queen Mary to England, the couple meet congenial companions. Sam talks frequently to Edith Cortright (Mary Astor), an American divorcee who resides in Italy, who is sympathetic to his eagerness to expand his horizons and learn new things. Fran indulges in a light flirtation with a handsome Englishman (David Niven) until he suggests they become more serious and then berates her rejection. Humiliated, Fran later persuades Sam to bypass England and go directly to Paris.
Once in France, Fran imagines herself a sophisticated world traveler with a high-class social life and pretends she is much younger than her years. Sam notes that those who would socialize with "hicks" like them were not really high-class. Over time, Fran increasingly sees her husband as boring and unimaginative since he is only interested in the usual tourist sites. Before long Fran becomes infatuated with cultured playboy Arnold Iselin (Paul Lukas), who invites her to Montreux and later Biarritz. She convinces Sam to allow her to spend the summer alone in Europe. Wanting to go home, Sam consents.
At home, Sam is warmly welcomed by friends, as well as his daughter (Kathryn Marlowe) and new son-in-law (John Payne), who have taken up residence in Fran's and his mansion. Soon, Sam complains that life at home has changed and he is tormented by thoughts that Fran might be changing also. When a Dodsworth manager in Europe confirms Sam's suspicions about Fran and Iselin, Sam immediately books passage to Europe on the RMS Aquitania. When confronted, Fran denies Sam's questions, but Iselin confirms everything. Fran breaks down and begs for forgiveness, initiating another reconciliation.
Although Sam still loves Fran, it is evident that they have been growing apart as they travel. In Vienna, their relationship becomes more strained. Even news of the birth of their first grandchild can't persuade Fran to return home. Initially it generates excitement until Fran begins to consider becoming a grandmother. Fran persuades Sam not to tell their European friends. That night Fran goes dancing again with the charming, young Baron Kurt von Obersdorf (Gregory Gaye) who tells her he would marry her if she were free. Later, after another quarrel, Fran informs Sam that she wants a divorce. Sam relents.
While the divorce is being arranged, Sam wanders across Europe on various sightseeing activities. Finally, Sam re-encounters Edith in an American Express office in Naples, near her home. She invites him to stay at her Italian villa. Comfortable in each other's company, the two rapidly fall in love. Sam talks of starting a new business: an airline connecting Moscow and Seattle via Siberia. He asks Edith to marry him and fly with him to Samarkand and other exotic locales on his new venture. She accepts with enthusiasm.
Meanwhile, in Vienna, Fran's plans shatter when she learns that Kurt's mother (Maria Ouspenskaya) has denied his request to marry Fran because he will need children to carry on the family line and Fran would be an "old wife of a young husband". In addition, divorce is against their religion. Kurt asks Fran to postpone their wedding until he can get his mother's approval, but Fran knows it is hopeless.
On a call, Sam agrees to sail home with Fran on the SS Rex and leaves Edith and her cautions that Fran can't make him happy. On the ship, after only a short time in Fran's critical and demanding company, Sam says, "Love has to stop somewhere short of suicide." He quickly exits the ship to rejoin a smiling Edith at her villa.
