In 1987, Jerry Lundegaard, the executive sales manager of a Minneapolis car dealership owned by his father-in-law Wade Gustafson, is desperate for money, and plots to have his wife Jean kidnapped. Mechanic and convicted felon Shep Proudfoot arranges a meeting for Jerry in Fargo, North Dakota, with criminals Carl Showalter and Gaear Grimsrud, who agree to do the job. Jerry gives them a new Oldsmobile Cutlass Ciera and promises them half of the ransom, which he claims is $80,000. Jerry pitches Wade a lucrative real estate deal and believes Wade has agreed to lend him $750,000 to finance it, so he attempts to call off the kidnapping. Wade and his accountant Stan Grossman inform Jerry that Wade will make the deal himself and pay Jerry only a comparatively modest finder's fee.
Carl and Gaear kidnap Jean and transport her to a remote cabin in Moose Lake. A state trooper stops them near Brainerd for not displaying temporary registration tags. When  the trooper hears Jean whimpering in the back seat, Gaear shoots him, then kills two passers-by who witnessed the scene.
Brainerd police chief Marge Gunderson, who is seven months pregnant, begins investigating. She correctly deduces that the dead trooper was ticketing a car with dealer plates. She later learns that two men driving a dealership vehicle checked into a nearby motel with two prostitutes and placed a call to Shep. After questioning the prostitutes, Marge visits Wade's dealership, where Shep feigns ignorance and Jerry nervously insists no cars are missing. While in Minneapolis, Marge reconnects with Mike Yanagita, a high school classmate. Mike awkwardly tries to romance her before breaking down and telling her that his wife has died. 
In light of the three murders, Carl demands Jerry hand over the entire $80,000. Jerry tells Wade the kidnappers have demanded $1 million and will deal only through him. Shep finds Carl with a call girl in a Minneapolis hotel room and attacks him for bringing Shep to the attention of the police. Carl angrily calls Jerry and demands that he bring the money immediately. Wade listens in on the call and insists on delivering the ransom himself and meets Carl at a parking garage. Wade refuses to hand it over without seeing his daughter, so Carl shoots him. Wade fires back, wounding Carl in the jaw. Carl kills Wade and a garage attendant, then drives away with the ransom.
On the way to Moose Lake, Carl discovers the briefcase contains $1 million. He takes $80,000 to split with Gaear then buries the rest in the snow alongside the highway. At the cabin, Carl finds that Gaear killed Jean because she would not be quiet. Carl says they should split up and leave immediately, and they argue over who will keep the Oldsmobile. Carl uses his injury as justification, insults Gaear, and attempts to leave with the car. Gaear follows Carl outside and kills him with an axe.
Marge learns from a friend that Yanagita lied; he has no wife and is mentally ill. Reflecting on this, Marge returns to Wade's dealership. Jerry becomes greatly agitated and again insists no cars are missing; he angrily tells Marge he will double-check his inventory. A few minutes later, Marge sees Jerry driving off the lot and calls the state police.
Marge drives to Moose Lake, tipped off by a local bartender who overheard a customer brag about killing someone. She sees the Olds Ciera, then discovers Gaear feeding Carl's body into a woodchipper. Gaear attempts to flee, but Marge shoots him in the leg and he is arrested. Shortly after, Jerry is arrested at a motel outside Bismarck, North Dakota.
Marge's husband, Norm, tells her the Postal Service has selected his painting of a mallard for a three-cent postage stamp and complains that his friend's painting won the competition for a twenty-nine cent stamp. Marge reminds him that smaller denomination stamps get used to make up the difference between the face value of old stamps and the new cost of first class postage. Norm is reassured, and the couple happily anticipate the birth of their child.