Daniel "Dan" Gallagher is an attorney from Manhattan. While his wife, Beth, and daughter, Ellen, are out of town visiting Beth's family, he has an affair with Alexandra "Alex" Forrest, an editor for a publishing company whom he had recently met at a work function. Initially, it seems that both Dan and Alex understand their affair to be just a fling, but Alex begins to cling to him.
Dan reluctantly spends the following day with Alex at her request. When he tries to leave, she cuts her wrists in a manipulative ploy to have him stay and save her. Dan helps her, stays overnight to ensure that she is all right and then leaves in the morning.
Alex shows up at his office to apologize for her behavior and invites him to a performance of Madame Butterfly, but he declines. She continues to call him at his office until he informs his secretary that he will no longer take her calls.
Alex insists that Dan meet with her and informs him that she is pregnant, arguing that he must take responsibility. After Dan changes their phone number, Alex meets Beth, who has advertised selling their apartment, pretending to be interested in buying it. That night, Dan goes to Alex's apartment to confront her, and they get into a scuffle. In one of the movie's most famous lines, she declares, "I'm not going to be ignored, Dan."
Dan, Beth and Ellen move to Bedford, but this does not dissuade Alex. She has a tape recording of herself delivered to him, which is full of verbal abuse. She stalks him, pours acid onto his car and follows him home later that evening. The sight of his happy family through their window makes her vomit.
Alex's obsession escalates when Dan approaches the police to file a restraining order, claiming it is "for a client." The lieutenant informs him that he cannot violate Alex's rights without probable cause, and that the "client" must own up to his adultery.
When Dan, Beth and Ellen return home one day after being out, Beth finds Ellen's pet rabbit dead, having been left boiling in a pot on their stove. Dan knows that Alex was behind it and, following this, confesses the affair and Alex's pregnancy to Beth. Enraged, Beth orders him to leave. Prior to departing, Dan calls Alex to say that his wife knows about the affair. Beth takes the phone and tells Alex that she will kill her if Alex comes near their family again.
Soon thereafter, Alex picks Ellen up from her school and kidnaps her, taking her to an amusement park. Beth drives around frantically looking for her and gets into an accident, requiring hospitalization. Alex returns Ellen home unharmed later that day.
After visiting Beth in the hospital, Dan forcibly enters Alex's apartment and attempts to strangle her, but stops short of killing her. She grabs a kitchen knife and lunges at him, but he manages to disarm her and then leaves. The police begin to search for Alex after Dan reports the kidnapping. Beth forgives Dan, and they return home after Beth is discharged from the hospital.
That evening, Dan is downstairs in the kitchen making tea for Beth while Beth is upstairs in the bathroom getting ready to take a bath. Before she disrobes and gets in, Alex suddenly appears with a knife. She accuses Beth of obstructing her from having Dan and attacks her. Dan rushes upstairs after hearing the attack. Initially, Dan is able to subdue Alex and appears to drown her in the bathtub. Moments later, she suddenly emerges from the water, swinging the knife. Beth quickly returns with a gun and shoots Alex, killing her. Dan completes his statement to the police and joins Beth in the living room, with a picture of their family in the foreground.
