In 1981, a man named Forrest Gump recounts his life story to strangers who happen to sit next to him at a bus stop.
As a boy in 1956, Forrest has an IQ of 75, and is fitted with leg braces to correct a curved spine. He lives in Greenbow, Alabama, with his mother, who runs a boarding house and encourages him to live beyond his disabilities. Among their temporary tenants is a young Elvis Presley, who is inspired to incorporate the boy's jerky leg and hip movements into his performances. On his first day of school, Forrest meets a girl named Jenny Curran, and the two become best friends. Jenny is a victim of sexual abuse at the hands of her widowed, alcoholic father; she is eventually removed from his custody.
Bullied because of his leg braces and dimwittedness, Jenny tells Forrest to run to flee from a group of children, and when his braces break off, he is revealed to be a fast runner. With this talent, he receives a football scholarship at the University of Alabama in 1962, where he is coached by Bear Bryant, becomes a top kick returner, is named to the All-American team, and meets president John F. Kennedy at the White House. In his first year at college, he witnesses Governor George Wallace's Stand in the Schoolhouse Door, and returns a dropped book to Vivian Malone Jones, one of the students admitted over state resistance. He visits Jenny at her college, where the two have an awkward sexual encounter.
After graduating college in 1966, Forrest enlists in the U.S. Army. During basic training, he befriends a fellow soldier named Benjamin Buford "Bubba" Blue, who convinces Forrest to go into the shrimping business with him after their service. While on leave, Forrest goes to Memphis, Tennessee, to see Jenny, who got expelled from college for posing in Playboy in her college sweater, and works as a singer in a strip club. However, he embarrasses her by attacking some patrons who are harassing her, causing the two to part ways. Soon afterward, Forrest and Bubba are sent to fight in Vietnam, serving with the 9th Infantry Division in the Mekong Delta region, under Lieutenant Dan Taylor. After months of routine operations, their platoon is ambushed while on patrol, and several members are killed in action, including Bubba. Forrest saves several others, including Lieutenant Dan, who loses both of his lower legs, while Forrest is shot "in the buttocks". While recovering from his wound, Forrest develops a talent for ping pong. Dan is embittered from having his life saved; he had hoped to die in combat like his ancestors, and detests being handicapped. Forrest is awarded the Medal of Honor for his heroism by President Lyndon B. Johnson.
At an antiwar March on the Pentagon rally, Forrest meets Abbie Hoffman, encounters a Black Panther group, and reunites with Jenny, who has become a drug-addicted hippie and antiwar activist. Still, the two soon part again when she leaves for San Francisco with her abusive boyfriend, Wesley, the president of Students for a Democratic Society at Berkeley. Forrest plays ping pong in the special services, competing against Chinese teams in ping-pong diplomacy, becoming a celebrity, and earns himself an interview alongside John Lennon on The Dick Cavett Show, appearing to influence Lennon's song, "Imagine". Forrest spends 1972 New Year's Eve in New York City with Lieutenant Dan, who has become an alcoholic, still bitter about his disability and the government's apathy toward Vietnam War veterans. Forrest's ping-pong success eventually leads to a meeting with President Richard Nixon. He is given a room in the Watergate complex, where he unwittingly exposes the Watergate scandal.
In 1974, Forrest is honorably discharged from the Army, and returns to Greenbow, where he accepts $25,000 to use a ping-pong paddle with Mao Zedong on it. He uses the earnings to buy a shrimping boat in Bayou La Batre, fulfilling his promise to Bubba. Lieutenant Dan joins Forrest as his first mate, and they initially have little success. However, after their boat becomes the only one to survive Hurricane Carmen, they pull in vast amounts of shrimp and create the profitable Bubba Gump Shrimp Company. Soon afterward, Lieutenant Dan finally thanks Forrest for saving his life, having "made his peace with God". Dan invests their money in early tech companies on the stock market, which Forrest mistakes for "some kind of fruit company", and the two become millionaires. Forrest gives half of his earnings to Bubba's family to fulfill the promise he made with Bubba to split evenly the revenue of their shrimping business. Forrest returns home to his mother, and cares for her during her terminal illness from cancer. After she dies, Forrest spends most of his time volunteering as a gardener at the University of Alabama.
In 1976, Jenny — recovering from years of drugs and physical abuse — reunites with Forrest. He eventually proposes to her, but she turns him down, much to Forrest's dismay. That night, she confesses to Forrest that she does indeed love him. They make love, but Jenny leaves the next day. Heartbroken, Forrest, "for no particular reason", starts running, and embarks on a cross-country marathon, becoming famous for another feat. Forrest garners many inspired followers, some of whom are struggling businessmen. After over three years of running, Forrest suddenly decides to return to Greenbow, much to the surprise of his followers.
In 1981, Forrest receives a letter from Jenny asking him to visit her, which is why he has been waiting at the bus stop. An elderly lady informs him that the address is nearby, so he rushes off. Forrest again reunites with Jenny, who introduces him to her young son, Forrest Gump Jr., revealing that Forrest is his father. Initially shocked at the revelation, Forrest starts to bond with his son. Jenny tells Forrest that she is sick with "some kind of virus", and the doctors cannot do anything for her. Jenny proposes marriage to Forrest, which he happily accepts, and the three move back to Greenbow. Among their wedding guests is Lt. Dan, now walking on titanium-alloy prosthetics, with his fiancée, Susan. Jenny succumbs to her illness a year later. Forrest is deeply saddened by her death, but becomes a loving, devoted father to Forrest Jr. as the two engage in activities like ping-pong and fishing. Forrest also buys the land that belonged to Jenny's father, and has the house demolished. Lastly, Forrest sees his son off on his first day of school.