On 1 May 1993, at the wedding of Angus and Laura in Somerset, the perpetually late best man Charles; his flatmate Scarlett; his aristocratic friend Fiona and her brother Tom; Gareth and his partner Matthew; and Charles's deaf brother David, all gather. All are unmarried. Charles forgets the rings and hastily borrows two from the congregation, which prove to be incongruous. At the reception, he makes a risqué speech and is attracted to Carrie, an American woman who has been working in England. They spend the night together. In the morning, Carrie, who is returning to the U.S., laments to him that they may have "missed a great opportunity".
Three months later, at the London wedding of Bernard and Lydia – who got together at the previous wedding – Tom is best man. Charles is excited to run into Carrie, who has returned to the U.K. He is disappointed to meet Hamish, Carrie's older, wealthy Scottish fiancé. A young woman named Serena is attracted to David.
During the reception, Charles is humiliated by several ex-girlfriends. These include the distraught Henrietta, called 'Duckface' by Fiona and whose brother was inadvertently insulted by Charles at the first wedding. Henrietta claims that Charles is a "serial monogamist" fearful of commitment. He retreats to an empty hotel suite, from which he sees Carrie and Hamish depart by taxi. Charles becomes temporarily trapped in the room when the newlyweds stumble in to have sex. Carrie returns to the reception; she and Charles spend a second night together.
A month later, Charles receives an invitation to Carrie's wedding to Hamish. While searching for a gift on London's South Bank, he runs into her. Charles helps Carrie choose a wedding dress, after which she recounts her 33 sexual partners to him; Charles, who was number 32, awkwardly confesses he loves her, and Carrie gently rebuffs him.
A month later, Charles and his friends attend Carrie and Hamish's wedding in Perthshire. The flamboyant Gareth tells the group to seek potential mates; Scarlett meets Chester, a Texan. Henrietta points out to Charles her new boyfriend. As Charles watches Carrie and Hamish dance, Fiona, aware of Charles's unhappiness, tells him that she remains single because she loves him. Charles, though sympathetic, does not reciprocate her feelings. During Hamish's speech, Gareth suffers a fatal heart attack.
At Gareth's funeral, Matthew recites "Funeral Blues", a poem by W. H. Auden. Carrie and Charles share a brief moment, and Charles and Tom then ponder that, despite their clique's pride in being single, Gareth and Matthew were as a "married" couple. They wonder whether seeking for "one true love" is futile.
Ten months later, Charles's own wedding day arrives; he is marrying Henrietta. While seating guests, Tom meets his distant cousin, Deirdre, whom he has not seen since childhood; they are smitten with each other. Scarlett and Chester are overjoyed to meet again.
Carrie arrives and tells Charles that she and Hamish have separated following a difficult marriage. Charles has an emotional crisis in a backroom of the church. After David and Matthew counsel him, he decides to proceed with the wedding. When the vicar asks whether anyone present has reason why the couple should not marry, David uses sign language to say that the groom has doubts and loves someone else. Charles confirms this by saying "I do", and a furious Henrietta knocks him out at the altar, ending the ceremony.
Later that day, Charles is at his flat discussing the fiasco with his friends when Carrie arrives to apologize for causing the trouble. Charles again says he loves her and proposes a lifelong commitment without marriage, which Carrie accepts. As they kiss, a thunderbolt flashes across the sky.
In an ending photo montage, Henrietta has married an Army officer; David married Serena; Scarlett has married Chester, the Texan; Tom married Deirdre; Matthew has found a new male partner; Fiona is shown with Prince Charles; and Charles and Carrie have had their first child.
