Get Out
The movie starts with a young black man wandering around a high class suburb, he’s confused about his directions when a vintage car pulls up behind him and the driver shoves him into the boot.
27-year-old Chris Washington, a Black photographer, travels to upstate New York for a weekend getaway to meet the family of his white girlfriend, Rose Armitage. Her brother Jeremy and their parents, neurosurgeon Dean and hypnotherapist Missy, make casual disparaging comments about Black people, and Chris witnesses eerie behavior from the family's Black servants, Georgina and Walter.
Missy pressures Chris into a hypnotherapy session to cure his smoking addiction. While in a trance, he confesses that his mother was killed in a hit-and-run when he was a child and he feels responsible as he waited too long to call for help. At Missy's prompting, he falls into a dark void she calls the "Sunken Place", where no one can hear him. The next morning, he is surprised to discover that the hypnosis worked; he no longer feels a desire to smoke.
Dozens of wealthy white people arrive for the Armitages' annual get-together; Chris feels uncomfortable with their remarks about him. He meets blind art dealer Jim Hudson, who takes interest in Chris' photography rather than his race, and another Black man, Logan King, whom he finds familiar but cannot place why. Like Walter and Georgina, Logan behaves oddly and is married to a white woman thirty years his senior. Chris tries to photograph Logan but when the camera flash goes off, Logan becomes hysterical, rushing at Chris and frantically shouting at him to "get out." 
Meanwhile, the party guests hold a silent auction, disguised as a game of bingo where Hudson makes the winning bid, with Chris as the "prize". Chris sends the photo of Logan to his friend, TSA officer Rod Williams, who recognizes him as Andre Hayworth, the missing man from Brooklyn whom Chris and Rod knew through mutual connections. Suspecting a conspiracy, Rod tries to tell the police but they just laugh him off. Chris finds photos of Rose in prior relationships with numerous Black partners, including Walter and Georgina, contradicting her claim that he is the first Black person she has ever dated. He tries to leave immediately but Rose, revealing her true colors, withholds the car keys, and Missy uses a hypnotic trigger to send him back to the Sunken Place.
Chris awakens strapped to an armchair in the basement. In a video presentation, Rose's grandfather, Roman, explains that the family transplants wealthy white people's brains into others' bodies, granting them preferred physical characteristics and a twisted form of immortality. Hudson then appears and explains that the host's consciousness remains in the Sunken Place, alive and able to observe but powerless as the person controls their body. He insists that he doesn't care about Chris' race and only wants his eyesight. Missy then knocks Chris out again.
When Jeremy comes to fetch Chris for the surgery, it is revealed that Chris blocked the hypnotic trigger by plugging his ears with cotton stuffing pulled from the armchair. He bludgeons Jeremy, kills Dean and Missy, then kills Jeremy when he attacks again. Chris attempts to escape in Jeremy's Porsche but accidentally hits Georgina, who is possessed by Rose's grandmother Marianne. Compelled by guilt from his mother's death, he retrieves her but she attacks him, causing the car to crash. Marianne/Georgina is killed.
Rose and Walter, who is possessed by Roman, arrive. Chris uses the flash on his phone to incapacitate Roman the way he did Logan/Andre. Walter temporarily regains control of his body, taking Rose's rifle and shooting her, then himself. Police sirens approach, and Chris surrenders, knowing the police will believe Rose's cries for help, but the driver is revealed to be Rod, who has come for his friend. The pair drives away, leaving Rose to bleed out on the road.