Banker Sam Wheat and his artist girlfriend Molly Jensen move into a Manhattan loft with the help of Sam's friend and co-worker Carl Bruner. One night, the couple are attacked on the street by a mugger, and though Sam appears to chase him away, he returns to a devastated Molly cradling his bloodied corpse and realizes he is dead. A bright beam of light shines down on Sam but he walks towards Molly and the light disappears.
As a ghost, a despondent Sam remains by Molly's side but is unable to interact with the physical world and other ghosts he encounters are unhelpful. Sometime later, the mugger breaks into and searches their apartment. Molly returns unexpectedly and Sam scares her cat, which can see him, causing it to attack the mugger, who flees. While pursuing the mugger, Sam is attacked by a violent ghost on the subway train who can touch physical objects. Sam follows the mugger back to his apartment, learning his name, Willie Lopez, and that Sam was deliberately targeted.
Sam later encounters Oda Mae Brown, who operates as a charlatan psychic, but he realizes she can actually hear him and demands she help him warn Molly. Though reluctant to help, Oda Mae agrees after Sam keeps her awake with his singing. Despite her intimate knowledge of Sam's and Molly's relationship, Oda Mae struggles to convince Molly the afterlife is real until Sam has Oda Mae say "ditto", his response whenever Molly said she loved him. Molly tells the police and Carl about Willie, but the police dismiss the story and reveal Oda Mae's extensive history of fraud, leaving Molly disheartened.
Meanwhile, Sam follows Carl and learns that he hired Willie to rob Sam of his book of bank passwords. Carl needs the passwords to launder $4 million of drug money through an account held by the fictional "Rita Miller" for his criminal employers. He breaks into Molly's apartment and takes the book, and later attempts to seduce her until the enraged Sam inadvertently knocks over a picture frame. Sam returns to the subway and convinces the violent ghost to teach him to focus his emotions and reliably interact with the physical world.
Sam visits Oda Mae, who is now popular with ghosts hoping to reach their living loved ones, and convinces her to pose as Rita Miller to withdraw the drug money, which she reluctantly donates to charity; Molly witnesses the transaction while visiting the bank. As Carl panics over the missing money and death threats from its owners, Sam uses his abilities to torment him. Carl visits Molly to discuss the haunting and she unwittingly reveals Oda Mae withdrew the money. While Molly is upstairs, Sam attacks Carl until he threatens to murder Molly if the money is not returned that night. Carl and Willie travel to confront Oda Mae but Sam warns her to hide and terrorizes Willie until he flees into a road and is struck and killed by a car. Shadowy figures appear and drag Willie's screaming ghost into the ground.
Oda Mae and Sam return to Molly's apartment, where he levitates a penny to convince her he is truly present. After Molly calls the police to report Carl, Oda Mae allows Sam to possess her so he can dance with Molly. However, the possession leaves him weakened and unable to help when Carl breaks into the apartment. Carl takes Molly hostage and demands the money but Sam recovers in time to attack him. In a panic, Carl ineffectually swings a metal hook and tries to escape through a window, but the hook swings back and shatters the window pane, causing a large shard of glass to impale and kill him. Sam watches as the shadowy figures drag Carl away.
As Sam checks on Molly and Oda Mae, the beam of light returns, allowing them both to see and hear him. Sam thanks Oda Mae and shares a kiss with Molly, telling her he loves her. She responds, "ditto", before Sam walks into the light.
