Giant (1956 film)
In the mid-1920s, wealthy Texas rancher Jordan "Bick" Benedict Jr. (Rock Hudson) travels to Maryland on a horse-buying trip. He meets free-thinking socialite Leslie Lynnton (Elizabeth Taylor), who quickly ends a budding relationship with a British diplomat. After a whirlwind romance, Leslie and Bick marry and return to the Benedicts' Texas cattle ranch, Reata. Bick's older sister, Luz, runs the household and resents Leslie's intrusion, compounding Leslie's difficulty adjusting to her new life. Leslie soon learns that she, like the other women, is expected to be subservient in the male-dominated Texas culture, and that Hispanics are viewed as inferior to whites. Jett Rink, a ranch hand, becomes infatuated with Leslie. When Jett drives her around the ranch, Leslie observes the Hispanic workers' terrible living conditions. She presses Bick to help improve their situation, and oversees the treatment of the infant son of Bick's ranch hand Angel Obregon, Angel, Jr.. Bick, however, is not receptive to his family doctor treating Hispanics. 
Luz is killed while riding Leslie's horse, War Winds, being bucked off after digging in her spurs as a hostile act towards Leslie. Luz's will leaves a small piece of Benedict land to Jett. Bick, who despises Jett, offers to buy the property at twice its value, but Jett refuses to sell and names his new land "Little Reata".
Leslie and Bick have twins, Jordan III ("Jordy") and Judy, and later have another daughter, Luz II. Bick pushes Jordy into pursuits that will make Jordy a rancher, which he resists. The marriage becomes strained, and Leslie takes the children to her parents for an extended visit, which includes her sister wedding Leslie's former beau. Bick goes to Maryland, and he and Leslie reconcile at the wedding and return to Texas.
Jett continues working his land, eventually striking oil. Jett flaunts his newfound fortune at the ranch house, insulting Bick and making a vulgar pass at Leslie. Jett prospers over the years. He tries to persuade Bick to let him drill for oil on Reata. Bick, determined to preserve his family's cattle ranching legacy, refuses.
Years later, in 1941, tensions arise regarding the now-grown Benedict children. Bick intends that Jordy will succeed him and run the ranch, but Jordy wants to become a doctor. Leslie plans for Judy to attend finishing school in Switzerland, but she wants to study animal husbandry at Texas Tech. Each sibling successfully convinces one parent to persuade the other to allow them to pursue their own goals.
At the family Christmas party, following the attack on Pearl Harbor, Bick offers Judy's new husband, Bob Dace, the opportunity to work on the ranch after the war ends. Dace declines, wanting to build his own life with Judy. Realizing that his children will not take over the ranch when he retires, Bick finally accepts Jett's offer to allow drilling on Reata. Once oil production starts on the ranch, the Benedicts grow wealthier and more powerful. The war ends with Bob's safe return. Angel Obregon, Jr., however, is killed in action. Jordy marries Juana, the daughter of the ranch's Hispanic doctor who treated Angel as a baby.
At his Austin hotel, Jett hosts a huge party in his own honor, and invites the Benedicts. Jett and Luz II have developed a flirtatious relationship which ends after Luz rejects Jett's awkward proposal. Jett becomes drunk. Jett prohibits his staff from serving Hispanics; consequently, Juana is ignored at the hotel beauty shop. Enraged, Jordy starts and loses a fight with Jett, who then has Jordy thrown out. Bick challenges Jett but, seeing that the drunken Jett is in no state to defend himself, he and the other Benedicts leave. Jett staggers into the banquet hall and sits in the seat of honor. He passes out as he attempts to give his speech in front of the packed ballroom. The guests leave with Jett unconscious. Later, Luz II hears the slumped-over Jett bemoaning his unrequited love for Leslie and leaves heartbroken; Jett topples over in a stupor and falls onto the floor.
Driving home the next day, the Benedicts stop at a diner. Sarge, the owner, insults Juana and she and Jordy's young son with a racial slur. When Sarge tries to eject a Hispanic family from the diner, Bick intervenes and a fight ensues. Repeatedly launching himself at the larger man, Bick refuses to quit in spite of a terrific beating; finally he is knocked cold. Back at Reata, Bick laments failing to preserve the Benedict family legacy. Leslie replies that, after the diner fight, he was her hero for the first time. She considers their own family legacy a success. They look at their two grandsons, one white and one Hispanic.