In 1955, youngster Henry Hill becomes enamored by the Mafia presence in his neighborhood in Brooklyn. He begins working for local caporegime Paulie Cicero and his associates: Jimmy Conway, an Irish American gangster, and Tommy DeVito, a fellow juvenile delinquent.
By the 1960s, Henry and Tommy spend most of their nights carousing with women. Henry starts dating Karen, a Jewish woman, but she is initially angered by how distracted Henry is during their date. After he shows her the glamorous side of his lifestyle, she falls in love with him. Sometime later, Karen calls Henry in tears, having been sexually harassed by her neighbor. Henry finds the young man and beats him with a revolver, which he then tells Karen to hide. She admits to herself that it actually turned her on and they get married shortly thereafter. After the wedding, she slowly learns more and more about Henry's criminal enterprises, but she comes to rationalize the gangster lifestyle. 
In 1970, Billy Batts, a made man in the Gambino crime family, insult Tommy at a nightclub owned by Henry. Tommy and Jimmy kill Batts, but Henry realize too late that the unsanctioned murder of a made man will invite retribution. Jimmy, Henry, and Tommy bury the body in upstate New York. Six months later, however, Jimmy learns that the burial site is slated for development, forcing them to exhume and relocate the decomposing corpse. Later, Henry witnesses Tommy murder Spider, a young bartender and waiter, after insulting him during a card game. Karen discovers Henry has a mistress and threatens him at gunpoint. Henry moves in with his mistress, but Paulie insists that he should return to Karen after collecting a debt from a gambler in Tampa with Jimmy. The collection mission succeeds, but only after they have severely beaten and threatened the debtor. Upon returning, Jimmy and Henry are arrested after being turned in by the gambler's sister, an FBI typist, and they receive ten-year prison sentences.
Prison life is idyllic, with Henry sharing a very large cell with Paulie and two other mobsters currently in prison for other crimes. They cook their own Italian dinners every evening with smuggled-in ingredients, and the prison guards are bribed into compliance. To finance his prison life and support his family on the outside, Henry has Karen smuggle in food and drugs, which he sells in cooperation with a fellow inmate from Pittsburgh and a bribed member of the prison staff. Karen discovers that Henry's mistress has been visiting him and almost publicly exposes the smuggled goods as revenge, but Henry quickly placates her by promising that he will be faithful from now on. 
Four years later, Henry is paroled and secretly expands his cocaine business with Jimmy and Tommy against Paulie's orders. Jimmy organizes a crew to the Lufthansa heist at John F. Kennedy International Airport, stealing over six million dollars. After some members purchase expensive items against Jimmy's orders and the getaway truck is found by police, he has most of the crew except for Tommy and Henry murdered. Tommy is later deceived by the Mafia leadership into believing he is to become a made man and is murdered as retribution for murdering Batts and other things. Jimmy grieves for Tommy.
By 1980, Henry develops a drug habit and becomes paranoid. Nonetheless, he continues operating his drug ring until he is suddenly arrested by narcotics agents and incarcerated. After bailing him out, Karen reveals that she flushed $60,000 worth of cocaine down the toilet to prevent the agents from finding it during their raid of their home, leaving them penniless. Paulie reproaches Henry for dealing drugs behind his back and severs their relationship with $3,200. Karen goes to Jimmy for help, but eventually flees upon suspecting he set up a trap to murder her. Henry later meets Jimmy at a diner and is asked to travel to Florida to do a hit, but the novelty of such a request makes Henry suspicious.
Realizing that Jimmy plans to also have him killed, Henry decides to become an informant and enroll his family into the witness protection program. He gives sufficient testimony in court to have Jimmy and Paulie convicted and moves to a nondescript neighborhood in accordance with the program. Despite this, an unhappy Henry realizes he has to live the rest of his life as a "schnook".