Gosford Park
In 1932, wealthy industrialist Sir William McCordle, his wife Lady Sylvia, and their daughter Isobel hold a shooting party at their country estate, Gosford Park. The guests include: Sylvia's sisters Louisa and Lavinia, and their husbands Lord (Raymond) Stockbridge and Commander Anthony Meredith; her aunt Constance, Countess of Trentham; the Hon. Freddie and Mabel Nesbitt; actor Ivor Novello and American film producer Morris Weissman; and latecomers Lord Rupert Standish and Jeremy Blond. Mrs Wilson, the housekeeper, assigns the visiting servants to their rooms and takes notice of Robert Parks, Lord Stockbridge's valet, who mentions being raised in an orphanage. Head housemaid Elsie tutors Lady Trentham's inexperienced maid, Mary MacEachran.
Following dinner, a silver carving knife is missing. Henry Denton, Weissman's valet, raises the staff's suspicions with intrusive questions at the staff's supper and an odd accent, which appears to be Scottish (though Mary, Scottish herself, knows he is not from Scotland). Later that evening, Henry has a late-night tryst with Lady Sylvia, despite an implied relationship with Weissman. Isobel asks Elsie to speak to Sir William about hiring Freddie, who is blackmailing Isobel over their affair and her aborted pregnancy. Freddie mistreats Mabel, whom he married for her money but overestimated her wealth, while Rupert courts Isobel. Lady Trentham confides to Mary that Sylvia and Louisa cut cards to decide which of them would marry Sir William, whose fortune was necessary to sustain their father, an earl, and themselves.
When the men go shooting, a stray shot grazes Sir William's ear. The ladies join them for lunch, and Sir William withdraws from Anthony's business scheme, leaving him financially ruined. Lady Sylvia informs her aunt Constance that Sir William may halt her allowance.
During dinner, Lady Sylvia berates Sir William and Elsie comes to his defence, inadvertently exposing their affair. Mrs Wilson brings William coffee, which he knocks away onto the floor and orders her to leave the mess, then demands whisky. The guests gather in the drawing room as Novello plays the piano and sings, with the servants listening outside; Freddie, Anthony, Robert, and footman George each slip away. One of the men, seen only by his trousers, puts on muddy galoshes left by one of the shooting party. The man then retrieves the missing knife and enters the library; finding Sir William asleep in his chair, and stabs him in the chest.
The body is discovered, and the bumbling Inspector Thompson and competent Constable Dexter arrive to investigate. Henry then visits Lady Sylvia for another tryst, despite her husband having just been murdered. It is discovered that Sir William was poisoned before being stabbed, and Mrs Croft, the head cook, tells her staff about Sir William's history of seducing, or raping, his female factory workers; those who became pregnant were forced to give their babies up for adoption or lose their jobs. Isobel gives Freddie a cheque, which he angrily tears up when confronted by Mabel. Inspector Thompson releases the guests without interviewing most of the staff.
Mary deduces that Robert is the killer; when she confronts him, he reveals that he is the illegitimate son of Sir William, who gave him to an orphanage, and that his mother, one of the factory workers, died soon after. He tells her he did not poison Sir William, and she realises he stabbed Sir William after he was dead, and does not care who poisoned him. As the guests and their servants depart, Freddie, his blackmail scheme with Isobel having failed, pursues a partnership with Anthony, whose business venture has been saved by Sir William's death. Despite his fondness for her, Rupert's courtship of Isobel is abruptly ended when she overhears his conversation with Mr Blond about the limits on her inheritance. 
Lady Trentham and Lady Sylvia discuss Mrs Croft and Mrs Wilson's long-standing feud, and Lady Sylvia reveals that Mrs Wilson's surname used to be Parks. Mary speaks to Mrs Wilson, who reveals that she and Mrs Croft are sisters; they both had children by Sir William while working at his factory. Mrs Croft kept her baby and lost her job, though the child died in infancy, while Mrs Wilson gave Robert up. Realising Robert was her son and that he intended to kill his father, she poisoned Sir William to ensure Robert's only crime would be stabbing a dead body. Mrs Croft comforts Mrs Wilson as Mary says goodbye to Robert, and the last guests go their separate ways.