Great Expectations (1946 film)
Orphan Phillip "Pip" Pirrip lives with his shrewish older sister and her kindhearted blacksmith husband, Joe Gargery. While visiting his parents' graves alone, Pip encounters an escaped convict, Abel Magwitch, who intimidates the boy into returning the next day with blacksmith's tools to remove his chains. Pip also brings some food. Famished, Magwitch devours the food and thanks him. Magwitch is caught when he attacks a hated fellow escapee rather than fleeing.
Miss Havisham, a rich, eccentric spinster, arranges to have Pip come to her mansion regularly to provide her with company and to play with her adopted daughter, beautiful but cruel teenager Estella. Estella mocks Pip's coarse manners at every opportunity, but young Pip had quickly fallen in love with her at first sight. He also meets a boy, Herbert Pocket, whom he beats in an impromptu boxing match. The visits come to an end when Pip turns 14 and begins his apprenticeship as a blacksmith. Estella also leaves, for France, to learn the ways of a lady.
Six years later, Miss Havisham's lawyer Mr Jaggers visits Pip to tell him a mysterious benefactor has offered to transform him into a gentleman with "great expectations"; Pip assumes it is Miss Havisham. He is taken to London and stays with Herbert Pocket, who teaches him how to behave like a gentleman. Herbert tells Pip that Miss Havisham was left at the altar many years ago and that she is determined to avenge herself against men, with Estella as her instrument to break men's hearts.
When Pip turns 21, Joe brings a request from Miss Havisham to visit her. There Pip is reunited with Estella, who tells him that she has no heart, and confesses that, despite flirting with the wealthy but unpopular Bentley Drummle, she has absolutely no feelings for him.
Back in London, Pip receives an unexpected visitor: Magwitch, who escaped from prison again and made a fortune sheep-farming in New South Wales, Australia. Magwitch reveals that he is Pip's benefactor, and that he was so touched by Pip's kindness that he resolved to prosper so that Pip could live a gentleman's life. He tells the "dear boy" that he considers him his son.
Growing suspicious of Drummle's overtures towards Estella, Pip visits her. She tells him she is going to marry Drummle. Pip confronts Miss Havisham for using Estella to manipulate him. Miss Havisham begs his forgiveness. Pip leaves, but when she stands to follow him, a piece of flaming wood from the fireplace rolls out and ignites her dress. Her screams alert Pip, who runs back to save her, but fails.
After being warned that an old enemy has learned that Magwitch is in London, Pip and Herbert plot to smuggle him onto a packet ship leaving England, on which Pip is to accompany him. They row out to the ship, but are intercepted by waiting police, tipped off by Magwitch's old enemy. Magwitch is injured in a struggle, but his nemesis is pushed down to his death by the ship's paddlewheels. Magwitch is captured and sentenced to death.
Magwitch tells Pip of his lost daughter, and Pip's suspicion that she is Estella is confirmed by Jaggers. Pip visits a dying Magwitch in prison, and tells him of her fate and that he, Pip, is in love with her. Magwitch dies a contented man.
Stricken by illness and with his expectations gone, Pip is taken home and nursed back to health by Joe. He revisits Miss Havisham's deserted house, where he finds Estella and learns that Drummle had broken off their engagement when Jaggers informed him of her parentage. Learning that Estella plans to live in seclusion in the house, which she has inherited, Pip tears down the curtains and opens the boarded-up windows and tells Estella that he has never stopped loving her. After hesitating, she embraces him and they leave the house together.