The film begins on 3 September 1939, the day Britain declared war on Germany. It tells the story of the Rowan family (Billy, his sisters Sue and Dawn, and his parents Grace and Clive), who live in a suburb of London. Clive joins the army, leaving Grace alone to watch over the children. She almost sends Billy and Susie away from London, but pulls them back at the last second on the train platform when she realizes she cannot bear to be apart from them. Thus, Billy stays in London for the first years of the war.
Seen through the eyes of 10-year-old Billy, the "fireworks" provided by the Blitz (September 1940 – May 1941) every night are as exciting as they are terrifying, and the ruins they leave behind are a fascinating playground for Billy and other boys his age, who are largely unsupervised. The other members of Billy's family do not see things in quite the same way as the bombs continue to drop, but their will to survive brings them closer together. The nightly raids do not provide the only drama, as Billy's older sister, Dawn, falls for Canadian soldier Bruce, becomes pregnant, and, finding her life turned upside down, soon discovers the value of her family.
When the Rowan's house burns down (not as a result of an air raid, but due to an ordinary fire), the family moves to the bucolic Thames-side home of Grace's parents. This provides an opportunity for Billy to spend more time with his curmudgeonly Grandfather George, who teaches him "the ways of the river".
In the autumn of 1942, Winston Churchill delivers his famous "end of the beginning" speech. Bruce returns from his secret posting and goes AWOL to find Dawn. Immediately after they are married in the village church, MPs take Bruce away. That afternoon in the living room of her grandparent's house, Dawn gives birth to a son, surrounded by her family. Billy swoons at the sight.
Although Grace has rented a house for the family just down the river, Billy must go back to London until he can get into the local school. George drives the miserable boy to his old school, only to find the block filled with screaming, ecstatic children, as a stray bomb has destroyed the building ("Thank you Adolf!" one boy cries). Roaring with laughter, George drives Billy home. The adult Billy recalls: "In all my life, nothing ever quite matched the  perfect joy of that moment. My school lay in ruins, and the river beckoned with the promise of stolen days." The credits roll over imagery of the river, to the music of "Land of Hope and Glory".