

The Rivers (1839)
Zebulon Prescott and his family set out west for the frontier on the Erie Canal. They are pulled through the first section on a barge and then build rafts to continue on the Ohio River. Along the journey, they meet mountain man Linus Rawlings, who is traveling east, to Pittsburgh, to trade his furs. Rawlings and Zebulon's daughter, Eve, are attracted to each other, but he is not ready to settle down.
Rawlings stops at an isolated trading post, advertised as a "likker" store near the river. It is actually a front run by a clan of river pirates, headed by "Alabama Colonel" Jeb Hawkins. Acting in a seducing fashion, Jeb's daughter Dora Hawkins leads Linus into a cave, stabs him in the back and pushes him into a hole. The pirates then steal his furs and sink his canoe. Wounded, Rawlings follows them. When they are about to rob the Prescott party, Linus interferes. Aided by the Prescotts, he kills all of the pirates.
The settlers then continue down the river. When the lead raft is caught in rapids, Zebulon and his wife Rebecca drown. Linus encounters the survivors. Deciding he cannot live without Eve, he asks to marry her and take her to Pittsburgh. However, she insists on homesteading at the spot where her parents died.

The Plains (1851)
Eve's sister Lilith chooses to go back East, and years later finds herself touring in St. Louis. While performing at the Music hall, she attracts the attention of professional gambler Cleve Van Valen. She later inherits a California gold mine. Lilith becomes partners with Agatha, an elderly woman desperate for any man. Cleve joins the wagon train taking her there and avoids paying debts in the process. Wagonmaster Roger Morgan and Cleve court her along the way, but she rejects them both.
Surviving an attack by Cheyennes, Lilith and Cleve arrive at the mine, only to find that it is worked out and worthless. Cleve leaves. Lilith returns to work in a camp town's dance hall, living out of a covered wagon. Morgan finds her and again proposes marriage, to no avail.
Later, Lilith sings on a riverboat. By chance, Cleve is a passenger. After hearing Lilith's voice, he leaves the poker table (and a winning hand), tells her he does not care that she is poor and proposes to her. He tells her of the business opportunities waiting in San Francisco. She accepts his proposal.

The Civil War (1861–1865)
Linus Rawlings has joined the Union army as a captain in the American Civil War. Despite Eve's wishes, their son Zeb enlists as well, looking for glory and an escape from farming. The bloody Battle of Shiloh shows Zeb that war is nothing like he imagined, and his father dies there. Zeb encounters a disillusioned Confederate who suggests deserting.
By chance, they bump into Generals Ulysses S. Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman. The Confederate realizes he has the opportunity to rid the South of two of its greatest enemies and tries to shoot them, leaving Zeb no choice but to kill him. Afterward, Zeb rejoins the army. Over the course of the war, he earns a battlefield commission.
When the war ends, he returns home as a lieutenant and learns his mother died, having lost the will to live after losing Linus. Zeb renounces his share of the family farm and leaves, wanting a different life.

The Railroad (1868)
In the late 1860s, two competing railroad lines, the Central Pacific Railroad and the Union Pacific Railroad, open up new territory.
Zeb becomes a lieutenant in the U.S. Cavalry, trying to maintain peace with the Native Americans with the help of buffalo hunter Jethro Stuart, an old friend of Linus'. When railroad man Mike King violates a treaty by building on Native American territory, the Arapahos retaliate by stampeding buffalo through his camp, killing many. Disgusted, Zeb resigns from the Army and leaves town.

The Outlaws (1889)
In San Francisco, the widowed Lilith auctions off her possessions to pay Cleve's debts. She travels to Arizona, inviting Zeb and his family to oversee her one remaining asset, a ranch.
Zeb (now a marshal), his wife Julie, and their children meet Lilith at Gold City's train station. There, Zeb runs into outlaw Charlie Gant. Zeb had previously killed Gant's brother in a gunfight. When Gant makes threats against Zeb and his family, Zeb turns to his friend, local marshal Lou Ramsey. However, Gant is not wanted for anything in that territory, so Ramsey can do nothing.
Nonetheless, Zeb decides he has to act. Suspecting Gant plans to rob a train's gold shipment, he prepares an ambush with Ramsey's reluctant help. Gant and his gang are killed in the shootout and resulting train wreck. Lilith and the Rawlings family travel by wagon to their new home.
