Jerry Maguire is a slick 35-year-old sports agent working for Sports Management International (SMI). After criticism from an injured player's son triggers a life-altering epiphany, he writes a mission statement about perceived dishonesty in the sports management business and his desire to work with fewer clients to produce a better, more caring personal relationship with them.
In response, SMI management sends Bob Sugar, Jerry's protégé, to fire him in a restaurant. This immediately spurs both men to race to call every one of Jerry's clients to retain their respective services. Jerry speaks to Arizona Cardinals wide receiver Rod Tidwell, one of his smallest clients who is disgruntled with his pay. Rod tests Jerry's resolve through a long tirade on his lack of contract extension. By the conclusion of the conversation, Bob has managed to persuade the rest of Jerry's clients to stick with SMI.
Leaving the office, Jerry loudly announces that he will start his own agency and asks if anyone will join him, to which only 26-year-old single mother Dorothy Boyd agrees. Frank "Cush" Cushman, a superstar quarterback prospect who expects to be the number one pick in the NFL Draft, initially also stays with Jerry after he makes a personal visit to the Cushman home. Frank's father agrees but insists on a handshake deal instead of a signed contract because "his word is strong as oak". However, Bob Sugar persuades Cush and his racist father to sign with SMI behind Jerry's back after seeing Jerry spend time to introduce Rod, "a Black man", to other football executives.
After an argument, Jerry breaks up with his disgruntled fiancée Avery who was emotionally unsupportive. He then turns to Dorothy, becoming closer to her young son, Ray. Jerry also sexually harasses and gropes Dorothy during a moment of vulnerability, before starting a romantic relationship with her.
Jerry concentrates all his efforts on Rod, now his only remaining client, who turns out to be very difficult to satisfy. In bad need of money, Jerry calls in a favor to get a contract extension from Rod's current team, the Arizona Cardinals, but received a low-ball offer. Rod and his wife decide to pass on the offer despite Jerry's warning that if he gets injured, he will receive nothing. 
Without any money coming in, Dorothy knows that Jerry is unable to afford payroll so she decides to move to San Diego as she has a secure job offer there alongside health benefits. However, she and Jerry then decide at the last minute to get married in order to share the health benefits.
Over the next several months, Rod and Jerry grow closer through a series of open and difficult conversations as they struggle to make ends meet. This culminates in the famous phrase "Help me, help you" that seems to finally get across to Rod to stop complaining and to start playing his heart out.
Rod takes Jerry's advice to prove he is worthy of his contract. He is playing well and his team is winning. Jerry's marriage with Dorothy deteriorates as they struggle financially, with Dorothy losing hope that it will work out.
During a December Monday Night Football game between the Cardinals and the Dallas Cowboys, Rod catches the winning touchdown that secures a spot for the Cardinals in the playoffs, but appears to receive a serious injury in the process. After a few scary minutes, he regains consciousness and celebrates with a dance for the wildly cheering crowd.
Afterwards, Jerry and Rod embrace in front of other athletes and sports agents and show how their relationship has progressed from a strictly business one to a close personal one, which was one of the points Jerry made in his mission statement. He then flies back home to meet Dorothy while she was in the midst of her sister's divorcee get-together where they drink wine and complain about the inadequacies of men and marriage. Jerry barges in which causes all eyes to look at him. He gives an impassioned speech telling her that he loves her and wants her in his life, which she reciprocates with the famous line "shut up, shut up, you had me at hello".
Rod appears on Roy Firestone's sports talk show. Unbeknownst to him, Jerry has secured him a massive $11.2 million contract with the Cardinals, allowing him to finish his pro football career in Arizona. Roy announces it which causes Rod to break down emotionally and thank everyone and extends warm gratitude to Jerry. Jerry speaks with several other pro athletes, some of whom have read his earlier mission statement and respect his work with Rod.
