Jezebel (1938 film)
In 1852 New Orleans, spoiled, strong-willed belle Julie Marsden is engaged to banker Preston "Pres" Dillard. In retaliation for Pres refusing to leave an important business meeting to accompany her to the last fitting of her ball gown, Julie buys a brazen red satin dress. The Olympus Ball is the most important social event of the year, and unmarried women are expected to wear virginal white. All of Julie's friends are shocked by her choice of red, but no one can dissuade her from wearing it. 
At the ball, Julie's attire is met with shock and disgust by all. She begs Pres to take her away, but instead he forces her to dance with him while the other couples abandon the floor. Pres later leaves Julie, implicitly breaking their engagement. In a final act of spite, Julie slaps him in the face. He later goes north on business, and Julie secludes herself at home.
A year later, Pres returns, and Julie comes back to life. She plans a celebratory homecoming party in his honor and prepares to humble herself before him. What Julie does not know is that Pres is accompanied by his new wife Amy. Stung, Julie prods her longtime admirer, skilled duelist Buck Cantrell, to quarrel with Pres. The scheme goes awry as Pres's brother Ted is goaded into challenging Buck. Julie tries to get Buck to skip the duel, but to no avail. To everyone's surprise, it is Buck who is killed. 
In the meantime, a deadly yellow fever epidemic breaks out in New Orleans. The people fight it with cannon and smoke. They believe the fever is highly contagious, and a rigid quarantine mandates that those trying to escape the city be shot. Pres is stricken and is ordered to be sent to the leper colony on Lazaret Island. Julie sneaks into the city to nurse Pres. Later, the family arrives, having been granted a pass to enter New Orleans. 
When the leper wagon comes to pick up Pres, his wife Amy begs to accompany him, but Julie tells her that she is too unfamiliar with Southern culture to be able to deal with the desperate conditions and people there. Julie begs to go in her place to try to redeem herself. Before agreeing, Amy asks if Pres still loves Julie.
Julie declares that he loves only his wife. Amy blesses them, and Julie accompanies Pres on a wagon loaded with other victims and caregivers.