Belinda MacDonald is a deaf-mute young woman living on Cape Breton Island on the east coast of Canada. Belinda is befriended by Dr. Robert Richardson, the new physician who recently moved to town. The doctor realizes that, although she cannot hear or speak, Belinda is very intelligent. She lives on a farm with her father, Black MacDonald, and her aunt, Aggie MacDonald. She wears plain work clothes, rarely goes into town, and only once to church. The family raises cattle and sheep and makes a small living grinding local wheat into flour at their small mill. Her father and aunt called Belinda "Dummy" and resent her because her mother died giving birth to her. Dr. Richardson teaches Belinda sign language and the signs for many common things and ideas. She learns to read.  Over time, his affection for her grows. He buys her a pretty dress and encourages her father to take her to town and church.
Dr. Richardson's secretary, Stella, is attracted to him and tries to get his attention, but the doctor does not reciprocate her feelings. After Stella figures out that he is becoming attracted to Belinda, she starts to resent both of them.
One of the family's customers, Laughlin "Locky" McCormick, meets Belinda when he and a group of young people stop by the MacDonald farm to pick up their orders of flour and ground grain. Locky is dating Stella at the time. Stella notices Locky noticing Belinda, and warns Locky to "stay away from the dummy." Locky gets drunk at a dance, leaves the dance, and goes to the farm where Belinda is alone, and rapes her. This results in her pregnancy, which is diagnosed by another doctor to whom Dr. Richardson had brought her for audiology testing. Belinda gives birth at home to a healthy baby boy, whom she names Johnny. The people in town begin to shun the MacDonald family and Dr. Richardson, as they gossip that he must be Johnny's father. Dr. Richardson tells Black that he is willing to marry Belinda in order to quiet town gossip. Black rejects this idea, as he believes that Dr. Richardson does not truly love Belinda, but merely pities her. Boycotted by locals, the doctor leaves the small community and takes a position in a Toronto hospital. He writes Belinda suggesting he will return for her and Johnny.
Locky goes to the MacDonald farm under the pretense of purchasing ground barley, but really wants to get a look at baby Johnny. When Black sees him, he orders Locky to leave. Locky inadvertently boasts about the infant son, saying, "spittin' image of his father," revealing to Black that he is the father of the child. Black follows Locky and threatens to expose him to the town. They have a fight on a seaside cliff and Locky throws Black off the cliff into the sea, killing him. Town gossip calls it an accident and does not suspect Locky. They celebrate his wedding to Stella.
Belinda and her aunt Aggie try to operate the farm but they are struggling to pay the bills and keep the farm running. Farmers boycott their flour mill.  The town, at the urging of Locky, has a meeting and declares Belinda unfit to care for the child and award him to Locky and Stella. They come to take Johnny.  Belinda first makes Stella realize that she is a smart and competent mother.  She also makes it clear that she will never give up her baby. Stella retreats and tells Locky that the mother should keep Johnny.  Locky demands the baby, telling his wife that it is his son. When he goes to retrieve the boy, he pushes Belinda aside. Before Locky can unlock the upstairs door, Belinda kills him with a shotgun.  Belinda is arrested and goes on trial for murder. At the trial, Dr. Richardson testifies that she was protecting her property and family. The court dismisses this as the doctor's love for her, and is ready to sentence Belinda to execution, but finally Stella blurts out that her husband Locky had confessed the truth about the rape to her on the day he was killed. Belinda is set free, and she, Johnny, Dr. Richardson and Aggie leave together.