Lady Bird (film)
In fall 2002, Christine McPherson, who has nicknamed herself "Lady Bird", is a senior at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Catholic High School in Sacramento, California. Despite her family's financial struggles, she longs to attend a prestigious college in "a city with culture" somewhere on the East Coast. Lady Bird's mother, Marion, refuses to call Lady Bird by her nickname. On a car ride, Marion tells Lady Bird that her dreams are impossible and she is ungrateful; this prompts Lady Bird to jump from the moving car, which breaks her arm.
Lady Bird and her best friend, Julie, join their school's theater program, where Lady Bird begins dating Danny, who attends the adjacent all-male school. Lady Bird spends her last Thanksgiving before graduation with Danny's wealthy family instead of her own, which disappoints Marion. After the opening night of the school production of Merrily We Roll Along, Lady Bird sees Danny kissing a boy in a bathroom stall and breaks up with him.
At Marion's behest, Lady Bird begins working at a coffee shop, where she meets Kyle, a popular student at the all-male school. Lady Bird abandons tryouts for the new school play to bond with Jenna Walton, another popular student, and they vandalize a nun's car. As she grows closer to Kyle and Jenna, Lady Bird begins spending less time with Julie and drops out of the theater program. She consoles Danny one day when he tearfully expresses his fear of coming out, and they become friends again.
At a house party, Lady Bird and Kyle kiss, and they both confess that they are virgins. After Lady Bird is suspended from school for arguing with a guest speaker at an anti-abortion assembly, Jenna tries to visit her, consequently discovering that Lady Bird had claimed Danny's grandmother's house as her own to impress her. Jenna agrees to forgive Lady Bird for the lie because of their mutual friendship with Kyle, but their friendship becomes strained. After Lady Bird and Kyle have sex for the first time, Kyle reveals he is not a virgin after all, upsetting Lady Bird and prompting her to seek comfort from her mother.
Lady Bird learns that her father, Larry, has lost his job and been battling depression for years. Despite Marion's insistence that the family cannot afford the tuition, Lady Bird secretly applies to East Coast colleges with her father's help. She is accepted into UC Davis but feels it is too close to home. She later learns she is on the wait list for a university in New York City but does not share the news with Marion.
Lady Bird sets out for the prom with Kyle, Jenna, and Jenna's boyfriend, but the latter three decide to go to a house party instead. Lady Bird initially agrees but then asks them to drop her off at Julie's house, where the two rekindle their friendship and go to prom together.
After graduation, Danny accidentally mentions the wait list in front of Marion, who stops speaking to Lady Bird for the rest of the summer. Lady Bird gets accepted to the university and her parents take her to the airport, but Marion refuses to go inside to say goodbye. Marion begins crying while leaving the airport and drives back, only to discover that Lady Bird has already gone through security. She cries in Larry's arms and he consoles her.
After arriving in New York, Lady Bird finds several letters addressed to her in her luggage. The letters were written and initially discarded by her mother but secretly collected and passed along by her father. Christine begins using her given name again and is hospitalized after drinking heavily at a party. Leaving the hospital, she visits a Presbyterian church service and is moved to tears. Christine calls home and leaves an apologetic voicemail for Marion, thanking Marion for all her help.