In 1935, a revolutionary uprising drives terrified Westerners to the airport in Baskul, China. The evacuation is organized by writer, soldier, and diplomat Robert Conway, before he is to return to the United Kingdom and become Foreign Secretary. He flies out with the last four evacuees, bound for Shanghai.
Unbeknownst to the passengers — paleontologist Alexander Lovett; notorious swindler Henry Barnard; bitter, terminally ill Gloria Stone; and Conway's younger brother George — their pilot has been forcibly replaced and their aircraft hijacked. It eventually runs out of fuel and crashes deep in the Himalayas, killing their abductor. 
The group is rescued by Chang and his men and taken to Shangri-La, an idyllic valley sheltered from the bitter cold. The contented inhabitants are led by the mysterious High Lama.
Initially anxious to return to civilization, most of the newcomers grow to love Shangri-La, including Gloria, who miraculously seems to be recovering. Conway is particularly enchanted, especially when he meets Sondra, a teacher who has grown up in Shangri-La. However, George and Maria, another young woman living there, are determined to leave.
Conway eventually has an audience with the High Lama and learns that he is a European Catholic priest, Father Perrault, who arrived in the area many years ago. The founder of Shangri-La is said to be two hundred years old, preserved, like the other residents, by the magical properties of the paradise he has created, but is finally dying and needs someone wise in the ways of the modern world to keep it safe. Having read Conway's writings, Sondra believed he is the one; the Lama agreed with her and arranged for Conway's abduction. The old man names Conway his successor and then peacefully passes away.
George refuses to believe the Lama's fantastic story, and that Maria is much older than the 20 she claims to be. Chang says Maria was brought to Shangri-La in 1888 and was 20 at the time, which would make her 66 or 67. (Sondra claims to be 30.) Uncertain and torn between love and loyalty, Conway reluctantly agrees to accompany George and Maria with a group of porters returning to their homes. 
The porters gradually leave the trio behind, even shooting at them for their amusement. However, the shots trigger an avalanche that buries the natives. After more gruelling travel, Maria collapses in the snow. Conway picks her up and carries her to the shelter of a cave. There they see she is dead, her withered face revealing her true age. George loses his sanity and jumps to his death.
Conway continues on, finally collapsing. He is found and taken to a Chinese mission, where a search party sent from Britain meets him. The ordeal has caused him to lose his memory of Shangri-La. 
On the voyage back to the United Kingdom, he remembers everything; he tells his story and then jumps ship in Singapore. Searchers pursue him back to the Himalayas, but are unable to follow him any further. In the final scene, he reaches the pass leading to Shangri-La.
