Max Rockatansky, a survivor haunted by memories of all the people he failed to protect, is captured by cult leader Immortan Joe's War Boys and taken to his fortress, the Citadel. Max, a universal donor, is forced to transfuse his blood to Nux, a sick War Boy. Meanwhile, Joe sends his lieutenant Imperator Furiosa in the armoured "War Rig" to trade produce and water for petrol and ammunition with two of his allies, the Bullet Farmer and the People Eater. When Joe realises his five wives are fleeing in the Rig, he leads his entire army in pursuit, calling on his allies to help.
Nux joins the pursuit with Max strapped to his car, and a chasing battle ensues. After entering enemy territory and fending off a rival gang, Furiosa drives into a sandstorm and loses all of her pursuers, except Nux, who attempts to sacrifice himself to blow up the Rig. Max frees himself and restrains Nux, and Furiosa destroys Nux's car.
After the sandstorm, Max catches Furiosa repairing the Rig, accompanied by Joe's wives: Toast, Capable, the Dag, Cheedo, and Angharad, the last of whom is heavily pregnant with Joe's child. Max fights and subdues Furiosa, but her engine kill switch prevents him from stealing the Rig. To escape Joe's wrath, he begrudgingly agrees to help Furiosa's group. Nux sneaks onto the Rig and attempts to kill Furiosa, but the wives overpower him and throw him out. He rejoins Joe's army when it catches up.
Furiosa drives through a canyon controlled by a biker gang, having pre-arranged to trade petrol for safe passage. The bikers turn on her when they spot Joe's army approaching, forcing her to flee. The bikers detonate the canyon walls to block Joe and then pursue the Rig as Max and Furiosa fend them off. Joe drives over the blockade in a monster truck and catches up with the Rig. He sends Nux to carjack the Rig, but Nux fails, to Joe's visible disgust. While helping Max, Angharad falls off the Rig and Joe fatally runs her over.
Capable finds Nux hiding in the Rig and consoles him as he laments his failure. At night, Furiosa and Max drive through a swamp and get stuck in the mud. They slow Joe's forces with landmines, but the Bullet Farmer continues the pursuit in his ATV. Furiosa and Max work together to blind the Bullet Farmer and disable his ATV. Moved by Capable's compassion, Nux joins the group and helps get the Rig moving again.
In the morning, Furiosa tells Max that her group is escaping to a "Green Place", the bountiful land where she grew up before she was kidnapped and brought to the Citadel. She spots a Green Place watchtower and identifies herself to the watchwoman, who summons their matriarchal clan, the Vuvalini. The Vuvalini recognise Furiosa as one of their own, but inform a devastated Furiosa that the Green Place was the now-uninhabitable swamp from the previous night, and that there are only seven Vuvalini left. The group decides to ride across an immense salt flat, hoping to find a new home on the other side. Max goes his own way.
After seeing a vision of a child he failed to save, Max catches up with the group and convinces them to return to the Citadel, since they know the now-undefended Citadel has ample water and crops and they do not know what lies beyond the salt flat. Joe intercepts them, and the two groups battle in the desert. Five Vuvalini are killed, Toast is captured, and Furiosa is severely wounded. Joe overtakes the Rig as they approach the canyon. While Max fights Joe's son and enforcer, Rictus, Furiosa boards Joe's truck to rescue Toast, who distracts Joe, allowing Furiosa to kill him. The remnants of the group drive Joe's truck back to the Citadel, while Nux sacrifices himself by wrecking the Rig to block the canyon behind them, killing Rictus. Max willingly transfuses his blood to Furiosa, saving her life.
Back at the Citadel, the people rejoice upon learning of Joe's death. As Max's companions are lifted to Joe's cliffside fortress, Max exchanges a glance with Furiosa before disappearing into the crowd.
