Charlie Barber, a successful theater director in New York City with his own theater company, is helming a play that stars, as usual, his wife of ten years, Nicole, who is a former teenage movie actress. The couple are experiencing marital troubles and see a mediator, who suggests they each write down what they love about one another, but Nicole is too embarrassed to read hers aloud and they decide to forgo counseling.
When Nicole is offered a starring role in a television pilot in Los Angeles, she decides to leave Charlie's company and go to live with her mother in West Hollywood, taking their son, Henry, with her. Thinking the separation will only be temporary, Charlie remains in New York, as his play is moving to Broadway. Despite the couple agreeing to split amicably and forgo lawyers, Nicole—encouraged by her producer—hires Nora Fanshaw, a high-profile family lawyer, who gets Nicole to open up about how she gradually felt neglected by Charlie, and how he rejects her ideas and desires. Nicole also suspects that Charlie slept with Mary Ann, his stage manager.
Excited by the news that he has won a MacArthur Fellowship grant, Charlie visits his family in LA, and Nicole serves him with divorce papers. He meets with Jay Marotta, a brash and expensive lawyer who urges Charlie to fight dirty, but Charlie returns to New York without hiring Jay. After receiving a phone call from Nora, who warns him to get a lawyer soon or risk losing custody of Henry, Charlie returns to LA and hires Bert Spitz, an empathetic older lawyer who favors a civil and conciliatory approach.
On Halloween, which Charlie is unexpectedly spending in LA, Henry mentions to Charlie that Nicole said she wants to stay in California permanently. Charlie calls Nicole and angrily interrogates her, and Nicole reveals she hacked his emails and found proof of his affair with Mary Ann.
Bert counsels Charlie to rent an apartment in LA to strengthen his custody case. To try to avoid going to court, Bert and Charlie meet with Nora and Nicole. Nora says Charlie refused to respect Nicole's wishes to move back to LA and claims that Henry would prefer to stay with his mother, rather than fly back and forth between coasts. Bert advises Charlie to give in on this point, but Charlie does not want to be separated from his son and fires Bert.
Using the first installment of his fellowship grant, Charlie hires Jay. In court, Nora and Jay argue aggressively on behalf of their clients, leading to a series of character assassinations—Nora highlights Charlie's emotional distance and past infidelity, while Jay exaggerates Nicole's drinking habits and threatens criminal action for hacking Charlie's emails. Meanwhile, Nicole and Charlie try to remain friendly out of court and share time with Henry, who is increasingly annoyed by the back-and-forth. Disillusioned with the legal process, the couple decide to meet in private, but their good intentions do not keep the discussion from becoming increasingly vicious, and Nicole ends up claiming Charlie has now fully merged with his own selfishness, while Charlie wishes death upon her before breaking down in tears and apologizing as she comforts him. Soon after, they reach an agreement and finalize the divorce. However, Nora negotiates slightly better terms for Nicole behind her back, causing Nicole to feel uncomfortable.
The following Halloween, Charlie again comes to LA. He learns Nicole has a new boyfriend and is nominated for an Emmy Award for directing an episode of her television series, and informs her that he has taken a residency at UCLA and will therefore be living in LA for awhile. While everyone is changing into their costumes, Charlie discovers Henry reading the list of things Nicole loves about Charlie that she wrote during mediation. Henry asks Charlie to read the rest aloud to him, and Charlie does so, becoming emotional as Nicole, unnoticed, watches from the doorway. After trick-or-treating, Nicole offers to let Charlie take Henry home, even though it is her night. She notices Charlie's shoe is untied, and, as his arms are full carrying Henry, ties it for him before he leaves.
