In 1983, the Korean immigrant Yi family moves from California to a plot of land in Arkansas, where the father, Jacob, believes the soil is fertile and hopes to grow Korean produce to sell to vendors in Dallas. One of his first decisions is to decline the services of a water diviner; he digs a well in a spot he chooses himself. He enlists the help of Paul, an eccentric Korean War veteran. Jacob is optimistic, but his wife, Monica, is disappointed with the mobile home and the distance from urban amenities, especially a hospital for David. The parents worry about their son David's heart condition, monitoring his heartbeat and frequently telling him not to run. The couple work sexing chicks at the nearby hatchery and argue constantly while David and his sister, Anne, eavesdrop.
To watch the children during the day, they arrange for Monica's mother, Soon-ja, to travel from South Korea. Forced to share a room with her, David avoids her because she does not fit his idea of a grandmother. Still, Soon-ja attempts to bond with the children and adjust to life in the United States. The well Jacob dug runs dry. He is reluctant to pay for county water, but eventually has to do so. He runs into additional difficulties, such as the vendor in Dallas canceling his order for their produce at the last minute, but perseveres despite Monica's desire to return to California. This brings their marriage closer to a breaking point.
Meanwhile, Soon-ja takes David to plant minari seeds by the creek. She tells him how resilient and useful the plant is, and predicts plentiful growth. David finally begins to warm to her after she teaches him hwatu, bandages his wounds, and soothes him to sleep. Soon-ja also encourages him to do more physical activity, something his parents discourage, but she says he is stronger than they think. Soon-ja then suffers a stroke overnight. She survives with treatment, but is left with impaired movement and speech.
The rest of the family head to Oklahoma City for David's heart appointment and to meet a vendor for Jacob's produce. They learn that his condition has dramatically improved and Jacob makes a deal to sell vegetables to a Korean grocer. But Jacob also indirectly admits to Monica that his crops' success is more important to him than their family's stability and, after an emotional argument, the two agree to separate.
During their absence, Soon-ja accidentally sets  on fire the barn containing the produce. On arriving home, Jacob rushes in to save the crops, followed by Monica. The fire grows out of control, and they save each other, leaving the barn to burn. Distraught and confused, Soon-ja wanders off. Anne and David call for her to return. Seeing that she is not responding, David runs to her, blocking her path. Soon-ja seems to recognize David for a moment and reaches for his hand. Her grandchildren lead her back home. The family is asleep on the floor, collapsed from fatigue. Soon-ja watches them sleep with a subdued expression.
Some time later, the parents are with the water diviner, who finds another spot for a well. They mark it with a stone signifying their intention to stay. Jacob and David then head to the creek to harvest the minari, which has grown successfully, with Jacob noting how good a spot Soon-ja picked to plant it.
