In the waning days of World War II, the U.S. cargo ship Reluctant operates in areas of the Pacific Ocean far from enemy action. Lt. Doug Roberts, the executive officer and cargo chief, shields the dispirited crew from their harsh captain, Lt Cdr. Morton. Roberts shares quarters with Ens. Frank Thurlowe Pulver, the laundry and morale officer, who avoids the captain so completely that Morton is initially unaware that Pulver is a crew member. Eager to join the fighting, Roberts repeatedly requests a transfer, but Morton's refusal to endorse his requests results in them being rejected.
Roberts surreptitiously requests and is granted crew liberty from one of Morton's superiors, a port captain who wishes to reward the Reluctant's crew for meeting a difficult resupply schedule. When the ship reaches an idyllic South Pacific island, however, Morton cancels the crew's shore leave. In private, Morton tells Roberts that his transfer requests and reports of low crew morale are hurting Morton's chance of promotion and that the crew will be denied leave unless Roberts submits fully to Morton's command style, ceases to request a transfer, and never tells the crew why. Roberts acquiesces, and the crew is granted liberty. The ship is kicked out of port after the crew’s raucous liberty and the angry captain, in reprimanding the crew, prods Roberts to back him.
The crew is mystified by Roberts's new strictness and deference to the captain. Morton convinces them that Roberts is vying for a promotion. When a crew member informs Roberts of a new Navy policy which could help him receive a transfer despite the captain's opposition, Roberts declines.
News of the Allied victory in Europe depresses Roberts further, as the war may end soon without his ever seeing combat, and Roberts tosses Morton's prized palm tree overboard. Morton eventually realizes Roberts is the likely culprit and summons him to his quarters and accuses him of the deed. An open microphone allows the crew to overhear their heated conversation and why Roberts changed.
Weeks later, Roberts receives an unexpected transfer. "Doc," the ship's doctor and Roberts's friend, confides to him that the crew risked court-martial by submitting a transfer request with Morton's forged signature of approval. Before he leaves, the crew present Roberts with a handmade medal, the Order of the Palm, for "action against the enemy."
Several weeks later, Pulver, who has been appointed cargo officer, receives several letters. The first is from Roberts, enthusiastic about his new assignment aboard the destroyer USS Livingston during the Battle of Okinawa. The second letter is from Pulver's college friend, Fornell, also assigned to the Livingston, which reveals that Roberts was killed in a kamikaze attack shortly after the first letter had been posted. Pulver throws the captain's replacement palm tree overboard, marches into Morton's cabin, and claims responsibility. Morton realizes his problems have not gone away.