In its very first combat encounter with the German Afrika Korps at the Battle of Kasserine Pass, the II Corps is defeated by Field Marshal Erwin Rommel. General George S. Patton is placed in command of II Corps and immediately begins instilling his authority amongst his untested and poorly disciplined troops. Alongside the poor condition of American soldiers in the II Corps, Patton also identifies how his British counterpart, General Bernard Montgomery, is constantly monopolising the allied effort to suit his own needs.
The eventual Allied victory in North Africa prompts Patton and Montgomery to come up with competing plans for the Allied invasion of Sicily. Patton's plan, drawn from reference to the Peloponnesian War, highlights the strategic importance of Syracuse; hypothesising that its fall would trigger an evacuation of Sicily. Patton proposes that Montgomery captures Syracuse, whereas he will land near Palermo then capture Messina to cut off the withdrawal. Though the plan impresses General Harold Alexander, to whom Patton and Montgomery report, General Dwight D. Eisenhower turns it down in favour of Montgomery's more cautious plan that places both armies in a side-by-side landing in the Gulf of Gela. The plan essentially relegates the American forces under Patton into protecting the British advance, and when the allies liberate Syracuse the evacuation predicted by Patton proves correct, but without allied forces in the north, thousands of Italian and German forces manage to retreat. The rear guard left behind to stall the allies bogs down the invasion, prompting an already irate Patton to drive west and capture Palermo before narrowly beating Montgomery to Messina. Though his advance breaks the deadlock in Sicily, his aggression does not sit well with his subordinates Omar Bradley and Lucian Truscott. During a visit to a field hospital, Patton notices a soldier crying amongst the wounded and dead. Furious, Patton accuses the soldiers of cowardice and slaps the soldier before demanding he is returned to the front lines. As a consequence, Eisenhower demands Patton apologise to the soldier, Patton however apologises to his entire command. Despite this, Patton is shocked to find out that he has been sidelined for the coming Allied invasion of France.
Instead, Patton is placed in command of the fictitious First United States Army Group as a decoy in London; the Allied command confident in that keeping Patton in England will tell the Germans that he will lead the invasion of Europe. At a war driver in Knutsford, Patton remarks that the post-war world will be dominated by the British-American spheres of influence; viewed as a slight to the Soviet Union. Despite Patton's protest that he has done nothing wrong, the situation has already spiralled from his control, and the decision to send him home or remain in England is placed upon General George Marshall. Though not present for the Normandy invasion, Patton is given a command by his now superior General Bradley of the Third Army. Under his leadership, the Third Army sweeps across France, but is brought to a halt just before entering Germany to allocate vital supplies to Montgomery's Operation Market Garden. Frustrated at again being sidelined to appease Montgomery, Patton demands to know why he was given a command if he cannot advance. Bradley refutes that it was his actual decision to place him in Europe, not anyone else's. Bradley also lets his colleague and friend know that whilst there is no doubt he is skilled and capable, he does not know when to shut up.
During the Battle of the Bulge Patton devises a plan to relieve the trapped 101st Airborne Division in Bastogne, which he does before smashing through the Siegfried Line and into Germany. After Germany capitulates, Patton's outspokenness lands him in trouble once again when he compares American politics to Nazism. Though he is relieved of command, Patton is kept on to see the rebuilding of Germany. Patton later walks Willie, his bull terrier. Patton's voice is heard;

For over a thousand years, Roman conquerors returning from the wars enjoyed the honor of a triumph - a tumultuous parade. In the procession came trumpeters and musicians and strange animals from the conquered territories, together with carts laden with treasure and captured armaments. The conqueror rode in a triumphal chariot, the dazed prisoners walking in chains before him. Sometimes his children, robed in white, stood with him in the chariot, or rode the trace horses. A slave stood behind the conqueror, holding a golden crown, and whispering in his ear a warning: that all glory ... is fleeting.
