Cassie Thomas is a 30-year-old medical school dropout who works in a coffee shop and spends her evenings going to bars and clubs and pretending to be drunk, then confronting men who attempt to take sexual advantage of her intoxication. It's slowly revealed that Cassie quit medical school after the public rape of her lifelong best friend, Nina, who subsequently dropped out and committed suicide when her rapist, Al Monroe, was cleared of wrongdoing.
Cassie becomes reacquainted with Ryan Cooper, a former classmate, who reveals Al is soon getting married and persuades her to go on a date with him. Angered that Al has found success and happiness while Nina is dead, Cassie begins to orchestrate revenge against the people that contributed to Al not being held accountable for the rape.
First, Cassie meets with Madison McPhee, another former classmate, who blames Nina for her own assault because she often drank to excess, adding, "What did she think was going to happen?" Cassie drugs Madison's wine and hires a man to take her to a hotel room to make her think she's been raped. Madison later leaves Cassie multiple distressed voicemails.
Cassie then targets Elizabeth Walker, the dean who dismissed Nina's case. Pretending to be a makeup artist for a popular band, she lures Walker's daughter into her car. She meets with Walker under the guise of returning to medical school, and finds that the dean only vaguely remembers Nina's case and even had Al return to give a talk at the school recently. Walker justifies her actions until Cassie tells her that she has just dropped her daughter off in the dorm room where Nina was raped with some drunk male students. Terrified, Walker demands to know where her daughter is, finally admitting her own complicity and inaction before Cassie admits she's safe nearby.
Next, Cassie meets with Al's lawyer, Jordan Green, and finds that he is deeply remorseful for his actions. Jordan, who is on a leave of absence after a nervous breakdown, describes how easy it is to build a case against a rape victim. Cassie chooses to forgive him, and later visits Nina's mother, who encourages her to move on with her life.
Cassie reconnects with Ryan. They begin dating and fall in love. Madison confronts Cassie at home, and Cassie assures her that she was not actually assaulted. Madison provides a phone containing a video of Nina's rape, revealing Ryan's presence at the party. Cassie confronts Ryan, who claims he was too drunk to remember the incident and should be forgiven because he was so young. Threatening to release the video, Cassie forces Ryan to reveal Al's bachelor party location. He begs for her forgiveness, but she refuses and they part acrimoniously.
Posing as a stripper at the party, Cassie drugs the attendees, handcuffs Al to a bed, and reveals her identity. Al breaks free and suffocates Cassie. The next morning, his friend Joe helps him burn her body in the woods. Cassie's parents report her missing, and the police investigate. Ryan, dishonestly framing Cassie as mentally disturbed, conceals her connection to Al's bachelor party.
At Al's wedding, Ryan is stunned to receive a scheduled text from Cassie, indicated that her plan is not finished. The police arrive at the reception to arrest Al and Joe. Flashbacks reveals that Jordan had received a package with the cell phone and instructions in case Cassie did not return from the bachelor party. The police had discovered a half-heart necklace with Nina's name on it in Cassie's burnt remains. Al is arrested for Cassie's murder as Ryan receives a final text from Cassie, signed with her and Nina's names.
