While transcribing the conversation of passers-by one evening, linguist Professor Higgins is mistaken for a policeman, causing  protests from the Covent Garden flower seller Eliza Doolittle and various bystanders. As the incident is being cleared up, Higgins talks to Colonel Pickering, a fellow scholar of languages and dialects, who has come from India in order to meet him. Higgins argues that by teaching Eliza to speak correctly by his methods, she could have a better future and would even be able to pass as a duchess.
Next morning, Eliza arrives at Higgins' house to ask for elocution lessons. Colonel Pickering makes a bet with him, offering to pay all the expenses if the professor manages to fulfill his boast. Eliza is then taken upstairs to have a bath by Mrs Pearce, the housekeeper, and while this is taking place, Eliza's father, the dustman Alfred Doolittle, arrives to demand compensation for the loss of his daughter. Amused by Doolittle's roguish attitude, Higgins offers him £10, but Doolittle will only accept £5, explaining that as one of the "undeserving poor" he only wants enough for a drunken weekend.
After a rigorous internship, Eliza is sent as an experiment to an at-home gathering held by Mrs Higgins, the professor's mother. There, though speaking in a well-bred accent, Eliza scandalizes those present with her vulgar, slang-filled conversation and profanity. But one of the guests - young Freddy Eynsford-Hill - is fascinated by her. After the guests leave, Mrs Higgins voices her disgust that Eliza's two protectors are treating her more like a plaything than a human being.
Following weeks of further coaching, during which Freddy tries in vain to see her again, Eliza is accompanied by Higgins and Pickering to an embassy reception. There Higgins meets his former pupil, the Hungarian Count Aristid Karpathy, who has become famous for his ability to coach American heiresses in elocution and identify the origins of high society people from their way of speaking. Higgins and Pickering fear that Eliza will be exposed by him, but she manages to deceive him so successfully that he takes her for a Hungarian princess - explaining that her English is too perfect to be that of a native speaker.
Returning from the reception, Higgins and Pickering congratulate each other on their success, neglecting Eliza's contribution and commitment and especially her feelings. Wounded by his indifference, Eliza quarrels with the professor, throwing his slippers in his face when he asks for them, and complains that she has become unsuited to her former way of life. After he goes to bed, she leaves to take refuge at the home of Mrs Higgins.
Next morning Higgins visits his mother and is relieved to learn that Eliza is there. Before the two can meet, however, Mr Doolittle arrives to complain of the way Higgins has disrupted his life. The professor had jested to an American millionaire that the most original moralist in England was Doolittle, and when the millionaire died he had left Doolittle a bequest of £3000 annually to give six lectures a year, thus forcing respectability on the dustman. He is now on his way to a fashionable London church to marry his unwed partner and persuades Eliza, Pickering and Mrs Higgins to support him through the ordeal.
Higgins and Eliza are left alone for a while and he tries to persuade her to return home with him, but she objects that he simply takes her for granted. Instead she would prefer to marry Freddy, who is charming but has no income. When Higgins scoffs at this, Eliza horrifies him by threatening to use her newly-learned talents to give elocution lessons and so gain economic independence. 
Once the party leaves to attend the wedding, an upset Higgins returns home after a long walk and accidentally turns on a recording of Eliza's first visit. As he listens, he is surprised to hear the real Eliza at the door to his study, mockingly quoting her former self by announcing, "I washed my face and hands before I come, I did". He turns his back and asks her where his slippers are, leaving their future relationship ambiguous.
