Charlie Simms is a scholarship student at Baird, an exclusive New England preparatory school. A woman hires him to watch over her uncle, retired Army Lieutenant Colonel Frank Slade, over Thanksgiving weekend. Charlie accepts so he can buy a plane ticket home to Gresham, Oregon for Christmas. He discovers Frank to be a highly decorated, blind Vietnam War veteran who has become an alcoholic.
Charlie and another student, George Willis, Jr., witness three classmates set up a prank to humiliate the headmaster, Mr. Trask. Afterward, Trask learns of the two witnesses and unsuccessfully presses them to name the perpetrators. He privately threatens Charlie with withdrawing the recommendation he has already made that Sims be accepted by Harvard University. Trask sets a meeting of the school disciplinary committee to take place the Monday after the Thanksgiving weekend.
Frank Slade unexpectedly takes Charlie on a trip to New York City, and arranges their stay at the Waldorf-Astoria hotel. During dinner in the Oak Room at the Plaza Hotel, Frank reveals that the goals of his trip are to stay at a luxurious hotel, enjoy good food and wine, visit his older brother, and have sex with a "terrific" woman. Afterward he intends to commit suicide. 
On Thanksgiving Day they pay an uninvited visit to Frank's brother at his home in White Plains. Frank rudely and  deliberately provokes everyone at dinner, which ends up in a confrontation with his nephew Randy, who reveals that Frank was not blinded heroically in combat but showing off juggling live grenades for a group of younger officers. 
As the pair return to New York City, Charlie mentions his problem at school. Frank advises Charlie to turn informant and take advantage to go to Harvard. He warns that George will probably submit to Trask's pressure, so Charlie should act first and get the benefit. While at a restaurant, Frank notices the scent of a young woman waiting for her date. He introduces himself and offers to teach her the tango.The evening ends after Frank visits with a high-class escort, completing the stated objectives of his trip.
Deeply despondent the next morning, Frank is uninterested in Charlie's suggestions for that day until Charlie suggests going for a ride. A former Ferrari owner, Frank talks the reluctant salesman into letting them take a convertible for a test ride. Once on the road, Frank becomes depressed again, until Charlie allows him to drive. Using Charlie’s eyes and commands to guide him, Frank is elated until he is pulled over by a policeman. Frank talks the officer into letting them go without revealing that he is blind.
After returning the car, Frank again becomes despondent. He jaywalks into rushing traffic on Park Avenue, and narrowly avoids being struck by multiple cars. When they return to the hotel, Frank sends Charlie to buy cigars. Charlie leaves but becomes suspicious and returns to find Frank donning his dress uniform, preparing to commit suicide with his service pistol. Frank backs down after Charlie convinces him that he has much to live for and should face his circumstances courageously.
On Monday morning, Charlie and George are subjected to a formal inquiry by the Baird disciplinary committee in front of the entire student body. Frank unexpectedly arrives and sits with Charlie. George's father counsels George to dissemble yet identify the perpetrators. George, Jr., provides tentative identifications but claims he was not wearing his contact lenses, and shifts confirming them to Charlie.
Charlie refuses to do so, resulting in Trask recommending his expulsion. Frank gives a speech defending Charlie, and obliquely mentions a bribe attempt. He denounces Baird for not living up to its own standards and urges the committee to value Charlie's integrity. The disciplinary committee places the instigators on probation, denies George credit for naming them, and excuses Charlie from the proceedings.
As Charlie escorts Frank to his limousine, political science professor Christine Downes, a member of the disciplinary committee, commends Frank for his speech. Frank flirts with her, and, as with his come-on to Donna, the girl he tangoed with, he impresses Christine by telling her the name of her perfume.  She is clearly intrigued. Charlie accompanies Frank home, where Frank happily greets his niece's children.
