Ship of Fools (film)
The ship's medical officer, Dr. Schumann, takes a special interest in La Condesa, a Spanish countess being deported from Cuba who has an opiate addiction which he reluctantly accommodates with prescriptions. Under arrest, she is being transported to a Spanish prison on the Canary Island of Tenerife for illegally hiding and helping arm agitators. The 600 laborers in steerage, deported to Spain because of the low market price of Cuban sugar, cheer the activist Condesa as she boards the ship under police escort. The Condesa reveals to the doctor that she was motivated by seeing the impoverished conditions under which the 5,000 laborers lived, under “patronage” of the man with whom she lived in luxury, supported by their labor. While she manipulates the doctor to cope with her sense of doom, her activism is in sympathy with the doctor's humanitarian insistence that the laborers in steerage be treated like human beings rather than cargo. Their shared sympathies soon evolve into love, though both realize it is a hopeless passion. The doctor conceals having a heart condition. 
Selected passengers—mostly Germans—are invited to dine each night at the captain's table. Some are amused and others offended by the anti-Semitic rants of a German (originally Austrian) businessman, Rieber, who begins an affair with Lizzi, who admires him until learning he is married. Rieber pontificates on topics such as “how we can expunge foreign influences and restore Germany to its National greatness” and the desirability of “exterminating the unfit at birth.” The captain is reassured by Rieber’s rants, believing that nobody can ever take his party seriously. Though Jews and dwarfs are excluded from the table, the Hutten’s dog, Baby, is allowed. When an animal-loving steerage laborer drowns saving Baby, who was thrown overboard by mischievous children, the Huttens worry about Baby and ignore the dead rescuer. 
The Jewish Lowenthal is seated at a side table with a dwarf named Glocken, and the two bond over their social exclusion. Later Freytag, a German passenger, is shocked to find himself blackballed from the Captain's Table when Rieber learns Freytag's wife is Jewish. Eventually Freytag discloses that he is separated from his Jewish wife, having found his marriage too detrimental for his career. Lowenthal, displaying the Iron Cross he earned in WWI, counsels Glocken regarding tactical accommodation to the Nazis, stating that Germany has been good for the Jews and the Jews have been good for Germany, "We are Germans first and Jews second...There are nearly a million Jews in Germany. What are they going to do, kill all of us?" Glocken tells him that he may be the biggest fool on the ship. 
An American artist couple, David and Jenny, have a passionate but rocky relationship. David is disconsolate at his lack of success as a socially committed artist; the independent Jenny finds his art unsellable and is not sufficiently willing to build him up. He is dismissive of her artistic talent, which she herself undervalues. David expresses that whoever shares his life will need to accept that his art will always supersede her. Jenny fears that their life together will be endlessly fighting with neither willing to put the other’s needs before their own.
Passengers are entertained nightly by a troupe of flamenco musicians and dancers, whose leader pimps the women in the troupe. Johann, an unpaid caregiver to Herr Graf, his invalid uncle, ignores the wholesome and insecure Elsa, who is traveling with her parents. Instead, Johann is attracted to one of the dancers, who rejects him for inability to pay. Johann threatens his stingy uncle if he does not give him money which has been promised to him in his uncle's will. He loses his virginity to one of the dancers, who treats him with gentleness when he pays.
Mary Treadwall, a divorced fading beauty hoping to recapture her youth in Paris, is “too far from the cradle” to interest the captain. She disdains the lieutenant who shows interest, dismissing him first as doing his duty to “unattended” women and later as insignificant. When fellow American, former baseball player Bill Tenny is seated at her table, she finds him crass. Bill expresses surprise at the open hostility toward the Jews onboard; she sarcastically replies that “maybe he was too busy lynching Negroes to take time out for the Jews.” Tenny pesters one of the flamenco dancers, believing that buying a magnum of champagne entitles him to her favors. She gives him the cabin number of the “snotty” Mrs. Treadwell. In a drunken stupor, Tenny accosts Mrs. Treadwell, who momentarily responds passionately until she realizes that he has mistaken her for a prostitute; she then slaps him repeatedly, crying out for help. 
The ship arrives in Tenerife where the deported workers from steerage disembark. The doctor briefly considers staying with the Condesa, but the captain calls him foolish, contending that the Condesa manipulated him for drugs. After an emotionally painful farewell with the doctor, the Condesa is forced to exit the ship under Civil Guard escort. When the captain tells the distraught doctor she isn’t worth his anguish, the doctor replies, “When I think of the things I have seen on this ship, the stupid cruelties, the vanities…she looked into the garbage dump, she did something about it, and we are the intelligent, civilized people who carry out orders we are given no matter what they may be.” The doctor dies of a heart attack before the ship reaches Bremerhaven; upon arrival his body is unloaded in a coffin with his estranged wife and sons in attendance.  
At disembarkation, as in a parade, most characters proceed with “business as usual,” having learned nothing on the voyage. The last passenger to leave the "Ship of Fools" is Glocken, who speaks directly to camera, as he did in the opening minutes of the film. Glocken asks the film's audience if they are thinking, "What has all this to do with us?  Nothing," he declares with a sardonic dismissive smile and exits into the crowd.