Sons and Lovers (film)
East Midlands housewife Gertrude Morel is miserable in her marriage to Walter, a coal miner who drinks heavily and sometimes shows his bitterness in violent ways. She has placed her hopes on her son Paul, who has the talent and ambition to become an artist, a dream that is mocked by Walter. Paul finds his desire to escape to a different life sidetracked by his mother's possessiveness, as well as by local girl Miriam Leivers, with whom he has an intellectual relationship that he would like to become physical. Miriam, however, is torn between her feelings and the views of her mother, who views sex as sinful and dirty.
Paul's brother Arthur dies in a mining accident, and the Morel's eldest son, William, returns home for the funeral. As William's train back to London is about to depart, he reveals that he is engaged to be married to a pretty woman from an affluent family, a woman who the Morels later learn is the temperamental opposite of Gertrude—light-spirited, and not particularly passionate or intellectual.
When a sketch Paul made of his father is exhibited in Nottingham, he overhears a wealthy art patron criticize the work, but the man later comes to the Morel house to offer to pay for Paul to attend art school in London, as he recognizes Paul's potential as an artist. Excited, Paul tells Miriam, but she rejects his physical advances. When Paul gets home, his parents have just had a violent confrontation, and he decides to forego art school, as he cannot bear to leave his mother alone with his father.
Paul takes a job in a local lace factory, where he becomes enchanted with Clara Dawes, a "liberated" feminist co-worker who is separated—but not divorced—from her husband, Baxter. Nonetheless, he continues seeing Miriam, and she finally agrees to have sex with him, but he immediately regrets convincing her to do so, as she did not seem to enjoy the experience, and he decides to stop seeing her. He and Clara begin a passionate affair, but he is not able to totally commit himself to her, in large part due to his mother's emotional hold on him. 
While Paul and Claire are away on a trip to the seaside, Baxter confronts Walter in a pub and tells him to keep Paul away from Claire. Walter blames Gertrude's clinginess for preventing Paul from being able to have a normal romantic relationship with a woman his age, but Gertrude says all she ever wanted was for Paul to be happy. Baxter is waiting for Paul when he returns from the trip, and, although Baxter wins the fight, he is injured. Clara, who has noted Paul's emotional distance, returns to her husband to nurse him back to health.
Gertrude has not seemed well recently, and, one evening, Paul comes home to discover that she has had a heart attack. She says she no longer wishes to see Walter, as she wants to remember the days when they were in love and not be reminded of all of the negative aspects of their current relationship. She dies early the next morning, and Walter tells Paul to not let her down like he did, encouraging him to go to London and, hopefully, find some happiness.
On a walk in the woods, Paul meets Miriam. She apologizes for his loss, and they learn that they are both going to London—Paul to attend art school, and Miriam to train to be a teacher. She suggests they marry so she can care for him, but Paul rejects her proposal, telling her that, after having belonged to his mother, he wants to stay free so he can learn "what it means to live."