In late 1968, three friends in a tight-knit Slavic American community in Western Pennsylvania—Mike Vronsky, Steven Pushkov, and Nikanor "Nick" Chevotarevich—work in a steel mill and hunt deer with their co-workers Stanley ("Stan"), Peter "Axel" Axelrod, and John Welsh. Mike, Steven, and Nick are preparing to leave for military service in Vietnam. Steven is engaged to Angela Ludhjduravic, who was secretly impregnated by another man. Mike and Nick are close friends who live together and both love Linda, who will be moving into their home to escape from her alcoholic father. While dancing at Steven and Angela's wedding, Linda accepts Nick's spontaneous marriage proposal. Nick implores Mike to ensure he returns from Vietnam. Mike, Nick, and their friends go on a final hunting trip. Mike kills a deer with a single shot.
In Vietnam in early 1969, Mike, a member of Special Forces, happens upon Nick and Steven in a village, where the three are imprisoned by the Viet Cong in a cage along a river and forced to participate in games of Russian roulette while the jailers bet. Steven fires his round at the ceiling and is forced into a cage with rats and previous victims of the jailers. Mike convinces his captors to put three bullets into the revolver's cylinder; Nick and Mike then use the pistol to overpower their captors and escape, rescuing Steven in the process.
The trio floats down the river but Nick's leg is shot; they are rescued by an American helicopter, but Steven falls back into the river. Mike drops down to help Steven while Nick is flown away. Steven's legs were broken in the fall, so Mike carries him until they meet refugees fleeing to Saigon.
Nick is treated at a U.S. military hospital. Once released, Nick, now suffering from PTSD, wanders into a gambling den. French businessman Julien Grinda persuades him to come inside. Upset, Nick interrupts a game of Russian roulette, pulling the trigger on himself. Mike is present as a spectator, but Nick and Julien hurriedly leave.
In 1970, Mike returns home, but cannot integrate into civilian life. He avoids a welcome-home party, opting to stay alone in a hotel. He visits Linda and learns that Nick has deserted. Mike then visits Angela, who is now a mother, but has slipped into catatonia following the return of Steven, who has lost both of his legs in the war. Stan, Axel, and John understand nothing of war or what Mike has experienced. Linda and Mike find comfort in each other's company. During a hunting trip, Mike stops himself from shooting a deer and returns to the cabin where he finds Stan cavalierly threatening Axel with his pistol. Mike takes it, chambering a single round, and triggers an empty chamber at Stan's head.
Mike visits Steven at a veterans' hospital; both of Steven's legs have been amputated, and he has lost the use of an arm. Steven refuses to come home, saying he no longer fits in. He tells Mike that he has been regularly receiving large sums of money from Vietnam. Mike intuits that Nick is the source of these payments, and forces Steven home to Angela. Mike returns to Vietnam in search of Nick. Wandering around Saigon, which is now in a state of chaos shortly before its fall, Mike finds Julien and persuades him to take him to the gambling den. Mike finds himself facing Nick, who has become a professional in the macabre game and fails to recognize Mike. Mike attempts to bring Nick back to reason by invoking memories of their hunting trips back home, but Nick maintains his indifference. During a game of Russian roulette, Nick recalls Mike's "one shot" method and smiles before pulling the trigger and killing himself.
Mike and his friends attend Nick's funeral, and the atmosphere at their local bar is dim and silent. Moved by emotion, John begins to sing "God Bless America" in honor of Nick, as everyone joins in.
