The Post (film)
In 1966, U.S. State Department analyst Daniel Ellsberg is sent to Vietnam, where he embeds with American soldiers and documents the on-the-ground reality of the Vietnam War. He soon realizes that the war is hopeless, and, when he returns to the U.S. to deliver his report, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara agrees. However, Ellsberg is left disillusioned when McNamara continues to publicly justify further deployments of American troops. 
After his mission ends, Ellsberg works for the RAND Corporation, a think-tank with access to classified information. Over the following years he secretly copies thousands of classified pages documenting long-term U.S. interference in Vietnam, dating back to the Truman administration; once he finishes copying the full collection, he leaks it to journalist Neil Sheehan at The New York Times. 
In 1971, Katharine Graham has been the owner and publisher of provincial newspaper The Washington Post for eight years since the suicide of her husband Phil Graham, the former publisher, and the death of her father Eugene Meyer, the former owner. Although she lacks journalistic and business experience, she hopes to take the company public and secure investment for higher-quality news of national importance. She personally appoints the bullish Ben Bradlee as the Post's executive editor as he agrees with her vision, but her male-dominated board still view her as a housewife in over her head. She is also still a prominent D.C. socialite, and Bradlee has to repeatedly assert his editorial independence whenever the paper runs a story critical of her friends.
McNamara, one of these friends, tells Graham that an "unflattering" story about him will be published in The New York Times—the first of Sheehan's scoops from Ellsberg's documents. As the Post's editors discuss how they might pursue the story further, an anonymous woman leaves one hundred pages of the leaked documents on a reporter's desk. Bradlee is delighted at the chance to get ahead of the Times on a major story in the Post's own backyard, but a federal district court issues an injunction against the Times. Graham—concerned about both the Post's liability and her own social standing—orders Bradlee to respect the injunction.
Post assistant editor Ben Bagdikian tracks down Ellsberg, a former colleague at RAND, as the source. Ellsberg gives him the full 4,000-page report and Post reporters dig through the pages, but their attorneys advise against publishing lest the Nixon administration file criminal charges. Agonizing over whether to publish, Graham confers with McNamara and her disapproving board. They warn that she will face social exile in D.C., retaliation from President Nixon, and losing investors. However, Bradlee argues that they have a strong public interest defense, and it could transform the Post into the important journalistic institution that Graham had been dreaming of. The documents also revealed his own circle of elite D.C. friends, including John F. Kennedy, lied to him to garner sympathetic coverage; he argues that Graham's own friendships with figures like McNamara should not influence her decision.  
Graham gives the go-ahead to print. However, Bagdikian then reveals he used the same source as Sheehan instead of independently verifying the documents. The Post's lawyers panic—it puts Graham and Bradlee in contempt of court under the original injunction, and opens them to further criminal liability under the Espionage Act.
The Post and Times appear before the Supreme Court to plead their First Amendment rights. In solidarity, other newspapers across the U.S. publish information from Ellsberg's documents. On June 30, 1971, the Supreme Court rules 6–3 in the newspapers' favor, vindicating Graham's decision. Nixon bars the Post from the White House. 
One year later, Watergate complex security guard Frank Wills discovers a burglary-in-progress and calls the police, inadvertently kicking off the Watergate scandal.