The Bridge on the River Kwai
In 1943, a contingent of British prisoners of war, led by Colonel Nicholson, arrive at a Japanese prison camp in Thailand. U.S. Navy Commander Shears tells Nicholson that the camp conditions are horrific. Nicholson forbids any escape attempts because headquarters ordered them to surrender. Also, the dense surrounding jungle renders escape virtually impossible.
Colonel Saito, the camp commandant, informs the new prisoners they will construct a railway bridge over the River Kwai connecting Bangkok and Rangoon. Nicholson objects, citing the Geneva Convention exempting officers from manual labour. Saito threatens to have the officers shot, until Major Clipton, the British medical officer, warns there are too many witnesses. The officers are left standing in the intense heat until evening when Saito then confines them to a punishment hut. Nicholson is beaten and locked in an iron box.
Meanwhile, Shears and two other prisoners escape. Shears is wounded and wanders into a Burmese village, where he is nursed back to health. He eventually reaches the British colony of Ceylon.
The bridge construction proceeds badly due to faulty Japanese engineering and the prisoners' slow pace and sabotage. Saito is required to commit ritual suicide if the completion deadline is unmet. Desperate, he releases Nicholson and his officers, exempting them from manual labour. Nicholson, shocked by the poor job his men have done, orders building a proper bridge. He considers it a tribute to the British Army's ingenuity but Clipton argues it is collaboration with the enemy. Nicholson's obsession with the bridge drives him to allow officers to voluntarily work on the project.
Shears is convalescing in Ceylon near a commando school referred to as "Force 316". Major Warden wants to recruit Shears for a commando mission to destroy the bridge. Shears refuses only to discover he has been temporarily transferred to the British military and has no choice.
Warden, Shears, and two other commandos—Chapman and Joyce—parachute into Thailand. Chapman is killed during the jump, and Warden is wounded in an encounter with a Japanese patrol. Khun Yai, a village chief, and a group of Siamese women lead Warden, Shears, and Joyce to the river. Under cover of darkness, Shears and Joyce plant explosives on the bridge towers. The first train to cross the bridge is scheduled for the following day, and Warden wants to destroy both. By daybreak, however, the river level has dropped, exposing the wire leading to the detonator.
Nicholson spots the wire, and he and Saito investigate the riverbank as the train approaches. Nicholson pulls up the wire on the riverbank, leading them toward Joyce, who is manning the detonator. Joyce breaks cover and stabs Saito to death. Nicholson inexplicably calls to Japanese soldiers for help and attempts to stop Joyce from reaching the detonator. Joyce is shot and Shears swims across the river to detonate the explosives, but he is wounded. Recognizing Shears, Nicholson comes to his senses and realizes what he has done.
Warden fires a mortar, killing Shears and Joyce and fatally wounding Nicholson. Nicholson falls on the plunger, blowing up the bridge, and the train hurtles into the river. Warden leaves with the Siamese women. Witnessing the carnage, Clipton exclaims, "Madness! ... Madness!"