Dancer and divorcee Paula McFadden (Marsha Mason) and her ten-year-old daughter Lucy (Quinn Cummings) live in a Manhattan apartment with her married boyfriend, Tony DeForrest. Coming home from shopping, Paula finds Tony gone as he had deserted her to travel to Italy for a film role. Prior to his departure (and unbeknownst to Paula), Tony sublet the apartment to Elliot Garfield (Richard Dreyfuss), a neurotic but sweet aspiring actor from Chicago, who shows up in the middle of the night expecting to move in. Paula, who is demanding, cynical, and neurotic, makes it clear that she does not like Elliot but reluctantly lets him move in. 
Paula is struggling to get back into shape so she can resume her career as a dancer. Meanwhile, Elliot has landed the title role in an off-off-Broadway production of Richard III, but the director, Mark (Paul Benedict), wants him to play Richard III of England as an exaggerated homosexual stereotype. Reluctantly, Elliot agrees to the non-traditional portrayal, despite knowing that it may mean the end of his acting career. Theater critics savage the show, paying special attention to trashing Elliot's performance. The play quickly closes, much to his relief.
Despite their frequent clashes and Paula's lack of gratitude for Elliot's help, the two fall in love and sleep together. Lucy grows cautious and sees the affair as a repeat of what happened with Tony. Elliot convinces Paula that he will not be a repeat; later he picks up Lucy from school and takes her on a carriage ride, during which she admits she likes him. In response, Elliot explains how much he cares for Lucy and Paula and that he would not do anything to hurt them.
Elliot lands a job at an improvisational theatre and is seen by a well-known film director. He is offered a film role, but the job is in Seattle and he will be gone for four weeks. Paula is scared that Elliot is leaving her, never to return, like all the other men in her life. Later, he calls Paula from the phone booth across the street and invites her to go with him while he is filming. Paula declines but is encouraged by ether invitation. Before hanging up, Elliot asks Paula to restring his prized guitar, and she realizes that this proves he really does love her and will return.