In January 1992, Chicago vascular surgeon Dr. Richard Kimble returns home to discover his wife, Helen, was murdered by a one-armed assailant who evades capture. Kimble's account of events is dismissed due to the absence of forced entry. Helen's substantial life insurance policy, and a misinterpreted 911 call, result in Kimble's wrongful arrest. Falsely accused of murder, he is convicted and receives a death sentence.
During transport to death row, Kimble's fellow prisoners attempt an escape. In the unrest, two prisoners and the driver are killed, sending the bus down a ravine and into the path of an oncoming train. Kimble saves a corrections officer and narrowly escapes the collision. Ninety minutes later, Deputy US Marshal Samuel Gerard and his staff arrive at the derailment scene and launch a manhunt. Kimble sneaks into a hospital to treat his wounds and acquire clothing. After altering his appearance, Kimble steals an ambulance and evades most of the marshals in a tunnel by entering a storm drain. Gerard follows, slips, and loses a gun. Kimble finds it and proclaims his innocence, pointing the gun at Gerard, who replies he does not care. Gerard, spare gun in hand, corners Kimble over a high spillway. Kimble jumps and escapes.
Seeking to clear his name, Kimble returns to Chicago and begins his search for the real murderer. He rents an apartment and acquires money from his friend and colleague Dr. Charles Nichols. Kimble assumes the identity of a janitor to infiltrate the prosthetic department at Cook County Hospital to make a list of patients who would need a prosthetic arm. Kimble observes a patient being misdiagnosed and changes the patient's medical orders, thus saving the patient's life. However, Kimble flees the building when Dr. Anne Eastman becomes suspicious and attempts to alert the authorities.
Gerard deduces what Kimble is doing and spots him at Chicago City Hall after interviewing a jailed suspect. Following their subsequent chase, Kimble disappears into Chicago's St. Patrick's Day parade. Later, he breaks into the home of another suspect on his list, Frederick Sykes, and discovers a photo that confirms Sykes as the murderer. Sykes, a former cop, now works security for Devlin-MacGregor, a pharmaceutical company that is releasing a new drug called Provasic. In the past, Kimble had investigated the drug and found that it causes liver damage, which would have prevented FDA approval. Kimble calls Gerard while still in Sykes' home, ensuring that the call is traced, then flees, leaving open evidence. With this lead, Gerard conducts his own parallel investigation, who’s now also suspicious of Sykes. 
As Kimble further investigates samples at his former hospital, Chicago Memorial Hospital, he figures out that Dr. Nichols, a board member of Devlin-MacGregor, covered up Provasic's perilous side effects, by replacing unhealthy samples with healthy ones, to get it approved. Nichols further ordered Sykes to murder Kimble in a staged burglary that went wrong, resulting in Helen's death, and presumably had Sykes murder Dr. Alec Lentz, another developer who also discovered Provasic's risks. En route to a hotel conference where Nichols is presenting Provasic, Kimble is attacked by Sykes on a train. Sykes murders a transit cop who interrupts their struggle, but is overpowered by Kimble and handcuffed to a pole.
Kimble publicly confronts Nichols at the conference, accusing him of falsifying Provasic's side-effects and for planning the murders. This leads to a fight that spills onto the roof. Gerard and his team arrive before both men crash through a skylight onto a descending elevator. Chicago Police issue a shoot-to-kill order for Kimble as the transit police officer's death is assumed to be his fault. However, Gerard stops a police helicopter from sniping Kimble. Nichols regains consciousness and tries to escape through a laundry room, but Kimble follows him. Gerard calls out to Kimble, informing him of the conspiracy and believes Kimble's innocence. Nichols knocks out Marshal Renfro, takes his gun, and as he readies to shoot Gerard, Kimble saves him by attacking Nichols from behind, with a pipe.
Kimble surrenders, and Sykes and Nichols are arrested. Kimble is escorted out of the hotel as the press questions the police about the newfound suspects, indicating Kimble's innocence. Gerard uncuffs Kimble and offers him an ice pack in the back of a squad car. They are driven away into the night, and Kimble is assured he will be exonerated.
