In 1963, narrator Aibileen Clark is an African-American domestic worker in Jackson, Mississippi, working for socialite Elizabeth Leefolt. She raises Elizabeth’s emotionally neglected two-year-old Mae Mobley. Aibileen's best friend, Minny Jackson, works for Mrs. Walters and her manipulative daughter Hillary "Hilly" Holbrook, who leads the women's socialite group.
Elizabeth and Hilly's mutual friend Eugenia "Skeeter" Phelan is an unmarried aspiring writer, recent graduate of Ole Miss who has been rejected by Elaine Stein, an editor at Harper & Row NYC. Securing a local job writing a housekeeping column, she witnesses the city's systemic racism and the demeaning mistreatment of maids. 
Hilly insists on installing separate bathrooms, which she wants enshrined in building code. Skeeter's mother Charlotte tells her the family maid Constantine quit, but Skeeter does not believe her. She decides to write a book of interviews with the maids to expose their experiences.
Minny is soon fired by Hilly for defiantly using an indoor bathroom during a dangerous tornado. Hilly vindictively renders Minny unemployable by spreading the lie that she stole from her, forcing her teenage daughter to quit school to work. 
Celia Rae Foote, a pregnant housewife ostracized by the socialites, seeks a maid as her house in Madison is massive and she can't cook. She gratefully hires Minny without telling her husband Johnny, Hilly's former love interest. Celia suffers a miscarriage, then reveals she had had a shotgun wedding, then miscarried. They discuss Hilly's envy of Celia over Johnny. Celia treats the black eye Minny's husband has given her.
Aibileen and Minny let Skeeter interview them after going to a dynamic sermon. Elaine Stein tells Skeeter she needs many more maids' stories for the book but fear of retribution prevents others from coming forward. 
Aibileen tells Skeeter about her only son's tragic death, due to his negligent foreman after an on-the-job accident. Skeeter slow-walks a piece in the Junior League newsletter on the "separate but equal" bathrooms for Hilly, instead submitting an embarrassing misprint.
Hilly refuses to advance money to her new maid, Yule May Davis, who needs $75 to send both her twins to Tougaloo College. When Yule May pawns a lost ring she found under a sofa, she is violently arrested after Hilly reports her. This incident and Medgar Evers' assassination inspire more maids to share their stories.
As Skeeter, Aibileen, and Minny fear for the maids' anonymity, Minny reveals the "terrible awful" as a form of insurance. After her termination, Minny brought Hilly her famous chocolate pie but reveals – after Hilly had finished two slices – she had baked her own excrement into it. Hilly later sent her mother to a nursing home for laughing about it.
Skeeter confronts Charlotte about Constantine's departure. She confesses that during a Daughters of America luncheon at her home, she fired Constantine when her daughter Rachel refused to enter the house through the kitchen. Rachel subsequently moved her heartbroken mother to Chicago, where she later died. Upset, Skeeter bursts into tears and runs out.
"The Help" is published anonymously and read widely by black and white communities of Jackson. Skeeter shares the proceeds with the maids, who each get the equivalent of several weeks' pay, with "more to come." Skeeter's boyfriend Stuart breaks up with her, realising she wrote it. 
Minny subtly reveals the "terrible awful" to Celia, calling her "Two Slice Hilly". Panicked, Hilly threatens to sue Skeeter for libel, but backs down when she realizes she would have to publicly admit to the pie story. Charlotte intervenes, ordering Hilly off the property, then mother and daughter reconcile.
Johnny tells Minny he both knows she has been working at their house, and promises her permanent job security, so she and her children can leave her abusive husband. Aibileen's congregation honors her for her leadership in the publication. Minny and Aibileen convince Skeeter to take a NYC job offer.
In revenge, Hilly pressures Elizabeth to fire Aibileen, claiming she has stolen silverware. She defends herself, Hilly storms out in tears, and Elizabeth fires her. As Aibileen bids farewell to Mae, who's crying for her, she begs Elizabeth to love her daughter, who also cries. As she's leaving, she decides to quit domestic work to become a writer.
