The film interweaves events some time after The Godfather and the early life of Vito Corleone.

Vito
In 1901, in Corleone, Sicily, Mafia chieftain Don Ciccio kills the family of nine-year-old Vito Andolini after his father, Antonio, refuses to pay tribute to Ciccio. Vito escapes to New York City and is registered on arrival as "Vito Corleone". In 1917, Vito lives in  Little Italy with his wife, Carmela, and their infant son, Sonny. He loses his job as a clerk in a grocery store due to the interference of Don Fanucci, a local Black Hand extortionist. His neighbor Peter Clemenza asks Vito to hide a bag of guns. As thanks, Clemenza enlists Vito's help in stealing a rug, which he gives to Carmela.
The Corleones have two more children: sons Fredo and Michael. Meanwhile, Vito, Clemenza, and new partner Salvatore Tessio earn money by stealing dresses and selling them locally door-to-door. This enterprise attracts the attention of Fanucci, who attempts to extort them for money by threatening to expose their fencing operation to the police. Vito tells his partners he can convince Fanucci to take less than the $600 he has demanded. "I'll make an offer he don't refuse," says Vito. They're skeptical but go along with the plan. Vito then meets with Fanucci in a restaurant while people outside celebrate a festival honoring San Rocco. Vito only pays Fanucci $100. Although irritated, Fanucci is impressed with Vito and suggests he work for him. Vito later shoots Fanucci to death at the entrance to Fanucci's apartment while festival revelers set off fireworks outside, neatly masking the sound of the gunshots. Vito retrieves the $100 from Fanucci's wallet and destroys the gun.
In 1922, Vito and his family travel to Sicily to establish an olive oil importing business from Corleone to Little Italy. He and his business partner, Don Tommasino, visit Don Ciccio, ostensibly to ask for Ciccio's blessing in starting their business. Ciccio, now an old man who has trouble hearing and seeing, doesn't recognize the adult Vito. Ciccio asks Vito to come close so he can hear him. Vito then reveals who he is and slices Ciccio's stomach open, killing him and avenging his family's death. Ciccio's guards shoot at Vito and Tommasino as they make their escape, injuring Tommasino and paralyzing him from the waist down for life.
Later, Vito and his family ride a train waving goodbye to family and friends including the now wheel-chair bound Tommasino.

Michael
In 1958, during his son's First Communion party at Lake Tahoe, Michael has a series of meetings in his role as the don of the Corleone crime family. Frank Pentangeli, a Corleone capo, is dismayed that Michael refuses to help defend his Bronx territory against the Rosato brothers, who work for Hyman Roth, a Jewish Mob boss and long-standing Corleone business partner. Senator Pat Geary, an anti-Italian xenophobe, demands a bribe to secure a casino gaming license for Michael. Michael refuses and counters that Geary should pay for the license himself. That night, a failed assassination attempt at his home prompts Michael to suddenly depart after confiding in consigliere Tom Hagen that he suspects a traitor within the family.
Michael suspects that Roth planned the assassination but falsely tells Roth he suspects Pentangeli. In New York City, following Michael's instructions, Pentangeli meets the Rosatos at a bar to make peace. However, the Rosatos attempt to strangle him. "Michael Corleone says hello," says one of the brothers while strangling Pentangeli, suggesting Michael ordered the hit. A police officer coincidentally walks in during the attempted murder, forcing the brothers to flee. Outside the bar, a gunfight erupts between the police, the brothers, and Pentangeli's bodyguard, Willie Cicci, who is shot and hit by a car. A police officer is also injured in the chaos. Despite this, both Pentangeli and Cicci survive the day's violent events.
Tom arrives at a Carson City brothel to meet Geary, who has woken up bewildered and horrified next to the bloodied corpse of a prostitute. Tom, who like Geary is Irish-American, reassures him that Fredo runs the brothel and that the situation will be taken care of in return for his pledge of friendship to the Corleone family.
A sickly Roth, Michael, and several of their partners travel to Havana to discuss their future Cuban business prospects under the cooperative government of Fulgencio Batista. Roth is exuberant about their prospects, but Michael has doubts about the government's response to the Cuban Revolution. On New Year's Eve, Fredo pretends not to know Johnny Ola, Roth's right-hand man, but later inadvertently reveals they know each other, leading Michael to realize that Fredo is the traitor. Michael orders hits on Ola and Roth; his enforcer strangles Ola but is killed by Cuban soldiers as he tries to smother Roth. Batista resigns and flees Cuba due to rebel advances. During the ensuing chaos, Michael, Fredo, and Roth separately escape Cuba. Back home, Michael is told that his wife Kay has miscarried.
In Washington, D.C., a Senate committee on organized crime is investigating the Corleone family, but Geary staunchly defends them. Pentangeli agrees to testify against Michael, who he believes had betrayed him to the Rosatos, and is placed under witness protection. On returning to Nevada, Fredo tells Michael that Ola offered him a position of responsibility and that he did not realize Roth was planning a hit. Michael disowns Fredo but orders that he should not be harmed while their mother is alive. Michael sends for Pentangeli's brother from Sicily, and Pentangeli, after seeing his brother in the hearing room, retracts his previous statement implicating Michael in organized crime; the hearing dissolves in an uproar. Kay reveals to Michael that she actually had an abortion, not a miscarriage, and that she intends to leave him and take their children. Outraged, Michael strikes Kay, banishes her from the family, and takes sole custody of the children.
Carmela dies some time later, and Michael hurries to wrap up loose ends. At the funeral, he embraces Fredo while giving a stern glance to family enforcer Al Neri. Kay visits her children; as she is saying goodbye, Michael arrives and closes the door on her. Roth returns to the United States after being refused asylum and entry to Israel. Corleone caporegime Rocco Lampone assassinates him during an interview at the airport and is shot while fleeing. Hagen visits Pentangeli at the army barracks where he is being held and the two discuss how failed conspirators against a Roman emperor could save their families by committing suicide. Pentangeli is later found dead in his bathtub, having slit his wrists. At the family compound, Michael calls his son Anthony away before he can join Fredo and Neri on a fishing trip. As Neri shoots Fredo, the gunshot echoes back to the compound where Michael is watching.
Michael reminisces about Vito's 50th birthday party on December 7, 1941, the same day Japan bombed Pearl Harbor. While the family waits to surprise Vito, Michael announces that he has dropped out of college and joined the Marines, angering Sonny and surprising Hagen. Fredo is the only member of the family who supports his decision. Vito is heard opening the door and everyone leaves the room to welcome him while Michael sits alone.
In the present day, Michael sits alone at the family compound looking out over the lake.
