The More the Merrier
Retired millionaire Benjamin Dingle arrives in Washington, DC, as an adviser on the housing shortage, and finds that his hotel suite will not be available for two days. He sees an ad for a roommate and talks the reluctant young woman, Connie Milligan, into letting him sublet half of her apartment. Then Dingle runs into Sergeant Joe Carter, who has no place to stay for several days while waiting to be shipped overseas. Recognizing him as a high-minded, clean-cut, attractive young man suitable for Connie, Dingle rents him half of his half.
When Connie finds out about the new arrangement, she orders both men to leave, but is forced to relent because she has already spent the pair's rent. Joe and Connie are attracted to each other, though she is engaged to pompous bureaucrat Charles J. Pendergast. Connie's mother married for love, not security, and Connie is determined not to repeat that mistake. Dingle happens to meet Pendergast at a business luncheon and is put off by what he sees. He decides in earnest that Joe would be a better match for his landlady.

One day, Dingle goes too far, reading aloud to Joe from Connie's private diary, including her thoughts about Joe. When she finds out, she demands they both leave the next day. Dingle takes full blame for the incident, and retreats to his now-available hotel room. Rather than turn him out to a sleepless night of roaming the streets, Connie allows Joe to remain in the apartment till the next morning. Joe asks Connie to go to dinner with him. She is reluctant to, but decides she will if Pendergast does not call for her by 8:00 that evening. At 8:00,  Joe and she are ready to leave, but a nosy teenaged neighbor seeks her advice and delays her until Pendergast arrives downstairs. Seeking to get a look at Connie's beau, Joe spies on the couple leaving together from the window with a pair of binoculars. When the young neighbor asks what he is doing, Joe flippantly tells him he is a Japanese spy.
Dingle calls Joe to meet him for dinner. There, Dingle bumps into Pendergast and Connie, and pretends he is meeting her for the first time, forcing Joe to do the same. Playing Cupid, Dingle distracts Pendergast in talk about his work, eventually maneuvering him up to his hotel room so that Connie and Joe can be alone together.
Joe walks Connie home. The two share their romantic pasts and end up kissing on the front steps. Inside, a sleepless Joe confesses through his bedroom wall that he loves her. She tells him she feels the same way, but refuses to marry him, as they will soon be forced apart when he leaves for Africa. 
Their cooing and billing is interrupted by the arrival of two brusque FBI agents, who have been tipped off that a Japanese spy is living there. Joe and Connie are taken to FBI headquarters. They identify Dingle as someone who can vouch for Joe's identity and innocence. Dingle arrives, bringing Pendergast, certain that fireworks will ensue. It comes out during questioning that Joe and Connie live at the same address. When they ask Mr. Dingle to tell Pendergast that their living arrangement is purely innocent, he denies knowing them.
Outside the station, Dingle says he lied to protect his reputation. Taking a taxi home, they all discuss what to do to avoid a scandal. Connie grows angry when Pendergast thinks only of his own reputation. When another passenger in the shared cab turns out to have been a reporter, Pendergast runs after him to try to stop him from writing about his fiancée cohabiting with Joe. 
Dingle assures Connie that if she marries Joe, the crisis will be averted, and they can get a quick annulment afterwards. They follow his advice and fly to South Carolina to wed, where a license can be more quickly obtained than in DC. Returning home, Connie allows Joe to spend his final night in her apartment. As Dingle had foreseen, Connie's attraction to Joe may yet overcome her misgivings; this is facilitated by Dingle having conscripted a group of men living downstairs to remove the wall between their two bedrooms. Outside, Dingle changes the ID card on the apartment door to read that it now belongs to Sgt. and Mrs. Carter.