The Best Years of Our Lives
At the end of World War II, three veterans meet on a flight to their midwestern hometown of Boone City: USAAF bombardier captain Fred Derry, U.S. Navy petty officer Homer Parrish, and U.S. Army sergeant Al Stephenson. The three veterans had very different lives before the war:
Fred Derry was a drug store soda jerk who lived with his parents in the poorer part of town. Shortly before shipping out, Fred married Marie after a whirlwind romance where Marie was impressed by Fred in his officer’s uniform. Marie has since been working in a nightclub, and enjoyed the extra income that Fred's military pay afforded her, without much thought to her husband.
Al Stephenson was an executive at the local bank and lived in an upscale apartment with his wife, Millie, and their children, Peggy and Rob. 
Homer Parrish was a star high school athlete living with his middle-class parents and younger sister. Homer had also been dating his next-door neighbor Wilma, whom he intended to marry upon his return.
Each man faces challenges integrating back into civilian life. Homer lost both hands in the war and though he has become quite functional in the use of his mechanical hooks, he cannot believe that Wilma will still want to marry him. Al, tired and jaded from the war, returns to the bank and is given a promotion, but wrestles with alcohol. Though highly decorated, Fred suffers from PTSD flashbacks by night. 
Fred arrives home and cannot locate his party girl wife, who does not expect him. The Stephensons and their daughter Peggy invite Fred along with them for the evening, bar hopping in celebration of Al’s return. An inebriated Fred keeps asking attractive Peggy who she is, and she keeps good-naturedly reminding him that she is “Al’s daughter.” 
Although proficient in managing the challenges of his disability, Homer is frustrated by his loss of independence and adjusting to his relationship with Wilma. Concerned that Wilma doesn’t fully understand the difficulties of being married to him with his disabilities, Homer demonstrates to her how she will need to assist him at bedtime when he removes his harness with his prosthetic hands, leaving him helpless. Wilma believes she can commit herself to him for life. 
Al continues to struggle with re-entry into normal life. Widely respected by the bank's senior management for his past business acumen, Al is criticized when he approves an unsecured loan to a farmer and fellow veteran who wants the loan to buy forty acres, but has no collateral for the purchase. With inhibitions lowered by excessive drinking, Al gives a speech at a banquet satirizing requiring a veteran to provide collateral before risking his life to take a hill in battle.
Unable to find a better job than soda jerk, Fred returns to the same drug store. Fred and Peggy develop an attraction for each other, which ultimately puts the married Fred at odds with Al. When Homer visits Fred at the drug store, another customer criticizes US involvement in the war, telling Homer his injuries were unnecessary. Homer responds angrily, and Fred intervenes on Homer's behalf, punching the customer and consequently being fired. Meanwhile, Fred's wife, Marie, frustrated with his lack of financial success and missing her past nightlife, tells Fred she is getting a divorce. Bitter, and seeing no future in Boone City, particularly with Al telling Fred to stay away from Peggy, Fred decides to catch the next plane out. While waiting at the airport, Fred walks into an aircraft boneyard, climbing into one of the decommissioned B-17 bombers. Sitting in the bombardier's seat, Fred has another flashback. He is roused out of his stressful memories by a work crew foreman, who informs him that the planes are being demolished for use in the growing prefab housing industry. Fred asks him if they need any help in the budding business and is hired.
Al, Millie, and Peggy attend Homer and Wilma's wedding, where Fred is best man. Now divorced, Fred reunites with Peggy after the ceremony. Fred expresses his love but tells her things may be financially difficult if she stays with him. Peggy's smile makes it clear she will remain committed to Fred.