The Hubbards are entertaining a dinner guest, William Marshall, a prominent Chicago businessman with whom they hope to partner in an enterprise to build a cotton mill in their sleepy town, taking advantage of low wages paid to workers. Marshall looks favorably on the plan and invites Regina to let him show her Chicago. After he leaves, Regina reveals that she plans to move to Chicago, taking her daughter, Alexandra, with her. She plans to finally live the privileged life she believes she deserves, away from the backward place where they presently live.
Regina proceeds to drive a hard bargain with her brothers for a two-thirds share of the mill in exchange for persuading Horace to invest $75,000, only a one-third share.  She sends Alexandra to Baltimore to bring her father home, supposedly because Regina misses him. 
When Alexandra accuses childhood friend, journalist David Hewitt, of not liking anyone in her family, he teases her saying he likes one person — her papa. Bidding her farewell at the train station as she leaves to pick up her father, he instructs her to open her eyes to circumstances surrounding her and to “think for yourself.” On her trip, he encourages her to widen her world, speak to strangers, and go beyond the societal conventions for women. Realizing that she will resent him for revealing truths about her unsavory family, he gently prods her to increase awareness. On another occasion, when asked by Regina whether he is courting her daughter, David replies that at present he is not declaring his intention, but that if he decides to do so, he will not care whether or not she approves. 
Oscar, having married and abused the sweet-souled, fragile, now-alcoholic Birdie to acquire her family's plantation and its cotton fields, now schemes to consolidate the family wealth by a marriage between his son, Leo, and Alexandra, but neither Horace nor Regina like the idea.
When Horace dislikes the proposal to invest in the cotton mill, Regina continues to press him, making him aware of her mercenary motives for asking him to return home. While the two of them argue upstairs, the brothers find an alternative. Leo, a teller at the bank, will “borrow” Horace's railroad bonds from his safe deposit box. They will use them as security for the construction, returning them long before it is time to clip the coupons. Gloating, Ben tells a furious, bewildered Regina they don't need her. 
Horace checks the content of his safe deposit box in the Hubbard-owned bank and finds bonds are missing. When Regina learns that her brothers have “borrowed” the bonds without permission, she threatens her brothers and nephew with exposure unless they give her 75% of the venture’s profit. 

Quarreling alone with Regina, Horace intends to frustrate and punish his contemptuous wife’s scheming by claiming he lent her brothers the bonds. She would only be entitled to repayment of the loan without any share of the profits. Regina spews her hatred for him, informing him that she never loved him and had grown contemptuous of his unquestioning acceptance of her constant excuses for rejecting his affections. During the quarrel, Horace suffers a heart attack, and Regina callously refuses him heart medication. Normally confined to a wheelchair, he collapses attempting to climb up a staircase to reach his medication while Regina makes no move to help. He dies shortly after.

Regina now forces her brothers to give her 75% ownership of the business. Ben takes the loss philosophically, saying that he must accept it for now, but the situation may turn. For example, he might begin to ask what a man in a wheelchair was doing on a staircase. A bewildered Alexandra overhears this. “What was Poppa doing on the staircase?” 
Alexandra becomes aware of her mother’s and uncles’ perfidy. Comforting her, David gently tells her that she had to learn the truth by herself; she would have resented anyone who told her about her family. Alexandra and David leave for a new life together. Regina is left utterly alone, unable to trust her devious brothers, still planning to move to Chicago to have the life for which she has yearned.
