The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming
A Soviet Navy submarine called Sprut (Russian: Спрут, lit. 'Octopus') draws too close to the New England coast one September morning when its captain wants to take a good look at North America and runs aground on a sandbar near the fictional Gloucester Island, off the New England coast, with a population of about 200 local residents. Rather than radio for help and risk an embarrassing international incident, the captain sends a nine-man landing party, headed by his zampolit (lit. 'political officer') Lieutenant Yuri Rozanov, to find a motor launch to help free the submarine from the bar. The men arrive at the house of Walt Whittaker, a vacationing playwright from New York City. Whittaker is eager to get his wife Elspeth and two children, obnoxious but precocious 9+1⁄2-year-old Pete and 3-year-old Annie, off the island now that summer is over.
Pete tells his disbelieving dad that "nine Russians with tommy guns" dressed in black uniforms are near the house, but Walt is soon met by Rozanov and one of his men, Alexei Kolchin, who identify themselves as strangers on the island and ask if there are any boats available. Walt is skeptical and asks if they are "Russians with machine guns," which startles Rozanov into admitting that they are Russians, and pulling a gun on Walt. Walt provides information on the lack of military and the small police forces of their island, and Rozanov promises no harm to the Whittakers if they hand over their station wagon. Elspeth provides the car keys, but before the Russians depart, Rozanov orders Alexei to prevent the Whittakers from fleeing. 
The Whittakers' station wagon quickly runs out of gasoline, forcing the Russians to walk. They steal an old sedan from Muriel Everett, the postmistress; she calls Alice Foss, the gossipy telephone switchboard operator, and before long, wild rumors about Russian parachutists and an air assault on the airport throw the entire island into confusion. Level-headed Police Chief Link Mattocks and his bumbling assistant Norman Jonas try to squelch an inept citizens' militia led by the blustering Fendall Hawkins.
Meanwhile, Walt, accompanied by Elspeth and Pete, manages to overpower Alexei when Alison Palmer, an attractive 18-year-old neighbor who works as Annie's babysitter, arrives for work that day and gives Walt an opening. Alexei, who is reluctant to hurt anyone, flees during the commotion, but when Walt, Elspeth, and Pete leave to find help, he returns to retrieve his weapon from the house, where only Alison and Annie remain. Alexei says that although he wants no fighting, he must obey his superiors in guarding the residence. He promises he will harm nobody and offers to surrender his gun as proof. Alison tells him that she trusts him and does not want his firearm. Alexei and Alison become attracted to each other, take a walk along the beach with Annie, and find commonality despite their different cultures and the Cold War hostility between their countries.
Trying to find the Russians himself, Walt is recaptured by them in the telephone central office. After subduing Mrs. Foss and tying  Walt and her  together, and disabling the island's telephone switchboard, seven of the Russians appropriate civilian clothes from a dry cleaner's, manage to steal a cabin cruiser, and head to the submarine, which is still aground. Back at the Whittaker house, Alexei and Alison have kissed and fallen in love. At the phone exchange, Walt and Mrs. Foss manage to hop outside the office, but fall down the stairs to the sidewalk below. They are discovered there by Elspeth and Pete, who untie them.  They return to their house, and Walt shoots at and almost kills Rozanov, who had reached there just ahead of them. With the misunderstandings cleared up, the Whittakers, Rozanov, and Alexei decide to head into town together to explain to everyone just what is going on.
As the tide rises, the sub floats off the sandbar before the cabin cruiser arrives, and it proceeds on the surface to the island's main harbor. Chief Mattocks, having investigated and debunked the rumor of an aerial assault, arrives back in town with the civilian militia. With Rozanov acting as translator, the Russian captain threatens to open fire on the town with his deck gun and machine guns unless the seven missing sailors are returned to him; his crew faces upwards of 100 armed, apprehensive, but determined townspeople. As the situation nears the breaking point, two small boys climb up to the church steeple to see better and one slips and falls from the steeple, but his belt catches on a gutter, leaving him precariously hanging 40 feet (12 m) in the air. The American islanders and the Russian submariners immediately unite to form a human pyramid to rescue the boy.
Peace and harmony are established between the two parties, but unfortunately, the overeager Hawkins has contacted the Air Force by radio. In a joint decision, the submarine heads out of the harbor with a convoy of villagers in small boats protecting it. Alexei says goodbye to Alison, the stolen boat with the missing Russian sailors meet the sub shortly thereafter, and the seven board the submarine, just before two Air Force F-101B Voodoo jets arrive. The jets break off after seeing the escorting flotilla of small craft, and to the cheers of the islanders, the Octopus is free to proceed to deep water and safety.
Luther Grilk, the town drunk, who had been trying to mount his horse, finally succeeds and rides heroically to the outer parts of the island shouting "The Russians are coming! The Russians are coming!", not knowing that they have already left.