The Last Picture Show
In 1951, Sonny Crawford and Duane Jackson are high-school seniors and friends in tiny Anarene, a declining oil town in northern Texas. Duane is dating Jacy Farrow, the richest and prettiest girl in town. Sonny breaks up with his girlfriend Charlene Duggs. He is secretly in love with Jacy.
At a Christmas dance, Jacy is invited by Lester Marlow to a skinny-dipping party at the home of Bobby Sheen, a wealthy young man who seems to be a better prospect than Duane. At the same party, Sonny kisses Ruth Popper, the depressed middle-aged wife of his high-school coach. Jacy lies to Duane and ends up going to the skinny-dipping party, doing a striptease on top of the diving board. Bobby later makes an advance on her, but then says he will not have sex with girls who are still virgins.
A group of boys including Duane and Sonny take their young, mentally disabled friend, Billy, to a prostitute to lose his virginity. The woman complains heavily, and when Billy leaves the car, his nose is bleeding. When the group takes Billy back home, local businessman Sam "The Lion" is angered by the group’s treatment of Billy. They try to explain their actions, but Sam forbids the group from entering any of his businesses, the only entertainment sources of Anarene: the pool hall, the movie theater, and the café. Later, Sam notices that Sonny actually takes good care of Billy and accepts Sonny back into the cafeteria for a cheeseburger.
During the weekend of New Year's Eve, Duane and Sonny go on a road trip to Mexico. Before they drive off, Sam wistfully wishes he still had the stamina to join them and gives them some extra money so they can enjoy themselves. The boys return two days later, hung over and tired, and learn that Sam has died suddenly of a stroke. Sam’s will left the movie theater to the lady who ran the concession stand, the café to Genevieve, $1,000 to the preacher's son Joe Bob Blanton, and the pool hall to Sonny.
Jacy finally invites Duane to a motel room to have sex, because she wants Bobby to accept her into his libertine circle, but Duane is unable to get an erection. She gets angry at Duane but they try again. She then breaks up with Duane by telephone. Soon after, Jacy learns that Bobby has already married another girl. Out of boredom and a sense of rejection, Jacy has sex with Abilene, a roughneck foreman who works for her father and is also her mother's lover. After the act, Abilene leaves Jacy at home and is brutally cold towards her. After entering the house, Jacy is caught by her mother Lois and starts crying. They both complain about the brutality of men and mention how nice Jacy's father Gene is.
Still sad and angry because of the breakup, Duane leaves town and starts working as a roughneck on an oil well in Odessa, a town in Texas just far away enough to not conveniently return home on a whim. Jacy then sets her sights on Sonny, who drops Ruth without a word and starts dreaming of marrying his true love. Duane returns home on leave, driving a brand-new Mercury, but quarrels and has a scuffle with Sonny over Jacy, smashing a beer bottle into Sonny's left eyebrow as the friends fall fighting in the street. The fracas is broken up by the locals and Sonny is hospitalized. During Sonny’s recovery, Ruth tries to visit him, but he pretends to be asleep.
Jacy suggests to Sonny that they should run away to get married in Oklahoma. While they are driving to their honeymoon in Lake Texacoma, Jacy reveals that she left a note to her parents explaining the entire plan. They are soon stopped by an Oklahoma state trooper who takes them to the nearest police station where the Farrows await. Gene dismisses Sonny completely, taking Jacy home in his car. Sonny rides back with Lois and, after arriving home, Lois reveals that Sam the Lion was her one true love when she was young, confirming a story that Sam had told the boys while on a previous fishing trip. Lois tells Sonny that he would be much better off with Ruth than with Jacy. The marriage is annulled and a short time passes. 
On Duane's last night of leave, Sonny goes to Duane's house for a last chance of reconciliation. The two friends make amends and Sonny reveals that Jacy went to college in Dallas and never returned to Anarene. They go to the movies because the theater is going to close due to lack of customers. The new owner blames television and her own lack of business acumen for the closing. The last picture show is the John Wayne Western Red River, set in Texas. 
The next morning, Sonny sees Duane off on the bus. Duane gives Sonny the keys to his Mercury and asks Sonny to take care of the car for him after Sonny reveals that he and Jacy "never made it to the motel." Sonny opens the pool hall when he hears a truck braking in the street nearby. The truck has killed Billy. Sonny sees Billy's broom in the middle of the street and some people stopping their cars. He approaches the local townsmen surrounding Billy's corpse; they blame the dead boy for being stupid and careless. Sonny berates the men for their behavior and carefully carries Billy's body to the top of a staircase, covering Billy’s face with Sonny’s letterman jacket. 
Angry and depressed with his current life, Sonny hops on his old battered truck and drives to the city limits. But he slowly changes his mind and drives back, parking his truck near Ruth's home and asking her if she could have a cup of coffee with him. She looks depressed and has shuttered herself in her house. After Ruth explodes in hurt and anger, breaking the coffee cup, she notices that Sonny is completely devastated. She demands that he look at her. He does and gently touches her hand. Still spent, she seems to forget her anger, takes pity on the boy, and starts to comfort him.