The Bells of St. Mary's
The unconventional Father Charles "Chuck" O'Malley is assigned to St. Mary's parish. Upon arriving at his quarters, the housekeeper warns him that their last priest prematurely aged while there. His duties include overseeing a nun-run, run-down inner-city school.
The first time Father O'Malley has been responsible for a school, he's nervous he must address the large group of nuns. While he's trying to make some opening remarks, they continually giggle which disconcerts him. Finally he discovers a playful kitten was upstaging him.
Getting a tour by Sister Superior Mary Benedict, O'Malley is to recommend whether or not the school should be closed and the children sent to another school with modern facilities. However, the sisters feel that God will provide for them and put their hopes in Horace P. Bogardus, a businessman who has constructed a modern building next door to the school on land he had bought from them. They are hoping he will donate it to them.
Father O'Malley and the dedicated but stubborn Sister Benedict, both wish to save the school, but their different views and methods often lead to disagreements. The Father has admitted eighth-grade student, Patsy of Syracuse, New York, whom the parish has taken in while her mother attempts to get back on her feet. He is told that, although she had been married to the father, the musician had gone to Cincinnati but broke his promise to send for her.
When Patsy falls behind, Benedict questions O'Malley, concerned about her background. Respecting the mother's privacy, he deflects her questions.
They have another clash involving student Eddie, who is being bullied by another, newer student. Concerned, the former tomboy although at first teaching the children to turn the other cheek, decides to teach him boxing from a manual.
The Father "coaches" Patsy to be original in a paper for Sister Benedict, earning her a high mark. When the bully next trips Eddie, the Sister coaches from the sidelines, and not only does he hold his own, but he makes peace and offers friendship to him.
They plant a seed of an idea to Mr. Bogardus. After being shown around the building, they point out that his donation of the building to the school would be his great legacy. Later, when he gets worked up over another costly delay, his doctor points out the stress is bad for his heart.
Father O'Malley surprises Patsy's mother with a reunion with her estranged husband. He found him via the musicians' union, as he's a musician. They reconcile, surprising Patsy when she sees them kiss, who had come to show her mother her graduation dress.
At her exams, Patsy is upset. The Father visits Sister Benedict, who tells him her marks are too low to pass. When he tries to convince her to pass her anyway, they butt heads. He points out the self-esteem issues that come with failing and talks about a very successful business owner in town who had had difficulties at school.
Mr. Bogardus, convinced by his doctor that doing so will prolong his life, starts to do selfless acts. He gives a blind beggar money, helps an older woman to get on the bus, adopts a homeless dog and ultimately gives the sisters his building for the school.
Patsy is finally introduced to the man she had seen kissing her mother, her father. She admits to sister Benedict that she intentionally failed her exams so she could be held back a year and stay with Sister Benedict. Patsy demonstrates knowing the material that was on the exam. Knowing this, Sister Benedict allows Patsy to graduate.
Preparations are being made with getting the new building set, and Sister Benedict enthusiastically oversees setting up the new facility. Unfortunately, Father O'Malley has to break the news that her placement has changed.
As Sister Benedict contracted tuberculosis, the physician recommends to Father O'Malley that she be transferred to a dry climate with non-parochial duties, but without telling her the reason. She assumes the transfer is because of her disagreements with O'Malley and struggles to understand the reasons for the path set out for her. Just before Sister Benedict departs, Father O'Malley reveals the true reason for her temporary transfer, and she then leaves happily, looking forward to her return.