In late 1823, during the Arikara War, fur trapper Hugh Glass guides Captain Andrew Henry's trappers through the territory of the present-day Dakotas. While he and his half-Pawnee son, Hawk, are hunting, the company's camp is attacked by an Arikara war party which is seeking to recover its chief's abducted daughter, Powaqa. Many of the trappers are killed during the fight, and the rest of them escape onto a boat. Guided by Glass, the survivors begin a trek to Fort Kiowa on foot because Glass believes that traveling down the Missouri River will make them vulnerable. After docking, the crew stash their pelts near the shore.
While he is scouting game, Glass is mauled and left near death by a female grizzly bear that is guarding her cubs. The racist trapper John Fitzgerald, fearing another Arikara attack, argues that the group must mercy-kill Glass and keep moving. Henry agrees, but he is unable to pull the trigger. Instead, he offers money in order to pay someone to stay with Glass and bury him after he dies. When the only volunteers are Hawk and the young Jim Bridger, Fitzgerald agrees to stay for money, in order to recoup his losses from the abandoned pelts.
After the others leave, Fitzgerald attempts to smother Glass but is stopped by Glass's son Hawk, who intervenes. Hawk threatens to shoot Fitzgerald and shouts for Bridger, who is away gathering water so Fitzgerald stabs Hawk to death as Glass watches helplessly. The next morning, Fitzgerald convinces Bridger who is unaware of Hawk's murder that the Arikara are approaching and they must abandon Glass. At first, Bridger protests, but he ultimately follows Fitzgerald after the latter leaves Glass half-buried alive in a makeshift grave. Bridger leaves his canteen with Glass, on which he had engraved a spiral symbol. After they depart, Fitzgerald admits that he lied about the approaching Arikara. When Fitzgerald and Bridger later meet Henry at the fort, Fitzgerald tells Henry that Glass died and Hawk vanished. Bridger is complicit in the lie about Glass's death, but he knows nothing about Hawk's murder.
Regaining some strength, Glass begins his arduous journey through the wilderness.  (The meaning of the word "revenant" is a person who has returned, especially supposedly from the dead.)  Glass performs a crude cauterization of his wounds and eludes the pursuing Arikara by jumping into river rapids. He later encounters Pawnee refugee Hikuc, who lost his family to the Sioux, and tells Glass that "revenge is in the Creator's hands." The men share bison meat and travel together. As a storm approaches, Hikuc constructs a makeshift sweat lodge for the feverish Glass to shelter in. After a hallucinogenic experience in the lodge, Glass emerges to discover that his wounds are healing, but French Canadian hunters have lynched Hikuc. He infiltrates their camp and sees the leader Toussaint (who previously sold horses to the Arikara), raping Powaqa. Glass frees her, and while she castrates Toussaint, he kills several hunters, and recovers Hikuc's horse. The following day, Glass is ambushed and driven over a cliff on his horse by the Arikara. He survives the stormy night by eviscerating the dead horse and sheltering inside its carcass.
A frightened French survivor staggers into Fort Kiowa, and Bridger recognizes the spiral engraved canteen as Glass's. Believing that it might be a surviving Hawk, Henry organizes a search party. Realizing that Glass is alive, Fitzgerald empties the outpost's safe and flees, intending to reach Texas. The search party finds the exhausted Glass near the Yellowstone River. Furious, Henry orders the arrest of Bridger, but Glass vouches for Bridger by stating that he was not present when Fitzgerald murdered his son, and Bridger was later deceived and threatened by the higher-ranking Fitzgerald. Glass and Henry set out in pursuit of Fitzgerald. Along the way, Glass reveals he once killed a soldier who tried to murder Hawk. 
After the two men split up, Fitzgerald ambushes, kills, and scalps Henry. Glass finds Henry's corpse, places it on his horse in an attempt to act as a decoy, and shoots Fitzgerald in the shoulder. He pursues Fitzgerald to a riverbank, where they engage in a brutal fight. Glass is about to kill Fitzgerald, but he spots a band of Arikara downstream. He remembers Hikuc's words and pushes Fitzgerald downstream into the hands of the Arikara. Their chief, Elk Dog, kills and scalps Fitzgerald, and the Arikara (who have found Powaqa) spare Glass. Glass retreats into the mountains, where he is visited by his wife's spirit.
