The Diary of Anne Frank (1959 film)
In 1945, Otto Frank returns to Amsterdam after World War II ended. After climbing the stairs to a deserted garret, he is joined and comforted by Miep Gies and Viktor Kugler, office workers who shielded him and his family from the Nazis. Otto begins to search for the diary written by his youngest daughter, Anne. Miep promptly retrieves it for him and he receives solace reading the words written by Anne three years earlier.
The action moves back to July 1942, and Anne begins by writing of the restrictions placed upon Jews that drove the Franks into hiding over the spice factory. Sharing the Franks' hiding place is the Van Daans and their teenage son, Peter. Kugler, who works in the office below, and Miep, his assistant, have arranged the hideaway and warn the families that they must maintain strict silence during daylight hours while the workers are there. Kraler delivers food and a box for Anne compiled by Otto, which contains her beloved photos of movie stars and a blank diary.
As the months pass, Anne's irrepressible energy reasserts itself and she constantly teases Peter, whose only attachment is to his cat, Mouschi. Otto schools Anne and her sister, Margot, while Mrs. Van Daan passes the time by recounting fond memories of her youth and possesses the fur coat given by her father. The strain of confinement causes the Van Daans to argue and pits Anne against her mother, Edith. One day, Kraler brings a radio to the attic, providing the families with ears to the world. Soon after, he asks them to take in another person, a Jewish dentist named Albert Dussell, who recounts the dire conditions outside, in which Jews suddenly disappear and are shipped to the concentration camps, and confirms the disappearance of many of their friends.
One night, Anne dreams of seeing one of her friends in a concentration camp and wakes up screaming. In October 1942, news came of the Allied landing in Africa but the bombing of Amsterdam intensified. During Hanukkah, Van Daan abruptly announces that Peter must get rid of Mouschi because he consumes too much food. Their argument is cut short when they hear a prowler break in the front door and the room falls silent, only when Peter crashes into an object on the floor while trying to catch Mouschi. The startled thief grabs a typewriter and flees. A watchman notices the break-in and summons two police officers, who search the premises, until Mouschi knocks a plate from the sink, reassuring them that the noise was caused by a common cat and they leave. Otto, hoping to foster faith and courage, leads everyone in a Hanukkah song.
In January 1944, Anne begins to attract Peter's attention while Miep brings the group a cake. Then Van Daan asks Miep to sell Petronella's fur coat so that he can buy cigarettes. Kraler warns that one of his employees asked for a raise and implies that something strange is going on in the attic, which Dussell dourly comments that it is just a matter of time before they are discovered. Anne blames the adults for the war which has destroyed all sense of hope and ideals and storms out of the room, where Peter follows and comforts her. Later, Anne confides her dreams of becoming a writer and Peter voices frustration about his inability to join the war effort.
One morning, Van Daan tries to steal some bread from the others but Edith catches him and denounces him, ordering him and his family to leave. As Dussell and Mrs. Van Daan quarrel over food, word comes over the radio of the Allied invasion of France and Mr. Van Daan breaks into tears of shame. Heartened by the news, everyone apologizes for their harsh words, and Anne dreams of being back in school by the fall.
By July 1944, the invasion had bogged down and Kraler was hospitalized with ulcers. Upon hearing that the police have found the stolen typewriter, Anne writes that her diary provides her with a way to go on living after her death. The Van Daans begin to quarrel once more, and Peter declares that he cannot tolerate the situation and Anne soothes him by reminding him of the goodness of those who have come to their aid. Their conversation is interrupted by the sirens of an approaching police truck. Certain of their impending arrest, they passionately kiss. As the German uniformed police break down the premises and the bookcase entrance, Otto declares they no longer have to live in fear but can go forward in hope.
Back in 1945, Otto tells Miep and Kraler about his long journey home after his release from Auschwitz. He learned about the deaths of Edith, Margot, the Van Daans, and Dussell, and he hopes that Anne had somehow survived until he sadly reveals that he met a woman who had been in Bergen-Belsen with Anne and confirmed her death. He then glances at Anne's diary and reads, "In spite of everything, I still believe that people are really good at heart," and reflects upon her unshakeable optimism.