The Cider House Rules (film)
Homer Wells grows up at St. Cloud's, a Maine orphanage directed by avuncular Dr. Wilbur Larch. Homer is returned to St. Cloud's twice by foster parents. The first family felt Homer was too quiet (due to orphanage babies soon learning that crying is pointless). The second beat him. Dr. Larch is addicted to ether, and he secretly performs abortions. Conditions at the orphanage are sparse, but the children have love and respect, and they are like an extended family. Older children, such as Buster, look out for the younger children, and in particular care for those who are sickly, including Fuzzy Stone, who was born prematurely to an alcoholic mother. Fuzzy suffers from respiratory disease and thus spends most of his time beneath a plastic tent ventilated with a breathing apparatus. Each night before sleeping, Dr. Larch says to children "Good night, you Princes of Maine! You Kings of New England!" as both an encouragement and a kind of blessing.
Homer, the oldest of the orphans, is very bright, helpful and even-tempered, so Larch trains him in obstetrics and abortions as an apprentice despite Homer's never having attended high school. Homer disapproves of abortions, and although Larch has trained him, Homer refuses to perform them. After several years, Homer is very skillful and confident in performing obstetrical duties. Larch wants Homer to take over after Larch retires, but Homer feels it's impossible, as he lacks formal medical education and he wants to see the outside world beyond the orphanage. Dr. Larch performs an abortion on Candy Kendall. Candy and her boyfriend, Wally Worthington, a young couple who came to the clinic for an abortion.  Wally is a pilot on leave from the service. Wally's mother, Olive, owns the Worthington family apple orchard where Homer settles as a worker. He lives on the Worthington estate in Cider House, the bunkhouse. Wally returns to World War II. Homer is exempt from this as Dr. Larch has diagnosed him with a heart condition.
While Wally is away, Candy starts flirting with Homer, and they have an affair. Homer picks apples with Arthur Rose's team of migrant workers whom the Worthingtons employ seasonally at the orchard. A list of rules for its occupants is posted in the Cider House, but as the migrant workers are illiterate, they have never known what the rules are. When Homer reads them the list, the workers observe the rules have been made without the occupants' consent by people who do not live there and do not share their problems. Consequently, they feel they can ignore the rules. Homer and Candy become much closer during harvest and spend more time together while Wally is fighting in Burma.
At St. Cloud's, Fuzzy Stone succumbs to his illness while watching a private screening of King Kong with Dr. Larch. Larch, Buster and the staff conceal Fuzzy's death from the other orphans by telling them that Fuzzy was adopted. Even so, the loss hits everyone hard, Larch most of all.
After Arthur and his team return to the orchard the following season, Homer discovers that Rose, Arthur's daughter, is pregnant. Candy learns that the baby's father is Arthur. Homer decides to abort Rose's baby with Arthur's assistance. A few days later, Rose tries to run away. When Arthur tries to say goodbye to her, she stabs him and flees. He then makes the injury worse, and as a last request, asks Homer and another worker to tell the police his death was a suicide.
Wally returns from Burma a paraplegic. Although Candy loves Homer, she decides to take care of Wally. Immediately after this, Homer learns Dr. Larch has died from an accidental overdose of ether. Homer decides he is most needed back at the orphanage. When he returns, he is greeted joyously by both the children and staff. He learns that not only did Larch fake Homer's medical record to keep him out of the war, but he also faked college credentials and used reverse psychology to convince the orphanage board to appoint Homer as the next director. Homer fills the paternal role that Larch previously held for the children of the orphanage, telling them, "Good night, you Princes of Maine! You Kings of New England!"