Around the 1960s, Mrs. and Mr. O'Brien are informed of the death of their 19-year-old son, R.L., throwing the family into turmoil. In 2010, eldest son Jack is adrift in his modern life in Dallas, Texas as an architect, disillusioned by his life full of disappointments. Meanwhile, voiceovers from Mrs. O'Brien ask God why R.L. had to die. Then, visuals depict the birth of the universe, followed by the creation of Earth and the beginning of life. At one point, a dinosaur chooses not to kill another dinosaur that is injured and lying on the side of a river bed. Finally, an asteroid strikes the Earth.
In a suburban neighborhood in Waco, Texas in the 1940s, the O'Briens are enthralled by their new baby Jack and later his two brothers, R.L. and Stevie. In the 1950s, Jack is conflicted with accepting the way of grace or nature, as embodied by his parents. Mrs. O'Brien, the embodiment of grace, presents the world to her sons as a place of wonder. Mr. O'Brien, the embodiment of nature, easily loses his temper as he struggles to reconcile his love for his sons, wanting to prepare them for a world he sees as corrupt and exploitative. He laments his decision to work in a power plant instead of pursuing his passion for music, and tries to get ahead by filing patents for various inventions.
Jack's perceptions of the world begin to change after his friend Taylor drowns. He questions how God could allow such things to happen, and that if God is malicious, he can be too. He becomes angry at his father's continuous hypocrisies and misdeeds, lashing out at his mother for tolerating him. When Mr. O'Brien goes on a business trip, the boys enjoy unfettered access to their mother, and Jack experiences the first twinges of rebelliousness. Peer-pressured, Jack commits vandalism and animal abuse. When trespassing into his crush's house, he steals her sheer nightgown, then fearfully throws it into a river. Shortly after Mr. O'Brien returns, the plant that he works at closes; he is given the option of relocating to work in an inferior position within the firm or losing his job. As the family packs up to move to the new job, he laments his path of life, asking Jack to forgive his domineering behavior; Jack reflectively says he embodies nature.
As Jack leaves work, he rides the elevator up, envisioning following a young girl across rocky terrain. As he walks through a wooden door frame erected on the rocks, he sees a view of the far distant future in which the Sun expands into a red giant, engulfing Earth and then shrinking into a white dwarf. Emerging from rustic doors, Jack follows the girl, then a young version of himself, across surreal landscapes. The dead return to life and gather at the seaside, where Jack is reunited with his family and all those who populate his memory. Jack meets his brothers and brings R.L. to his parents, who bids goodbye as he steps out of a home into a vast expanse. Accompanied by two girls in white, Mrs. O'Brien gracefully whispers, "I give him to you. I give you my son."
Jack's vision ends and he leaves the building, smiling contentedly. The mysterious light shown before continues to flicker in the darkness.