Andy Davis, now 17 years old, is leaving for college, and his toys have not been played with for years. He intends to take only Woody; Buzz Lightyear, Jessie, and the remaining toys are put in a bag to be stored in the attic. Andy's mother mistakenly takes the bag to the curb for garbage pickup. The toys escape and, believing Andy intended to throw them away, climb in a donation box with Barbie bound for Sunnyside Daycare. Woody follows them and fails to convince the others of the mistake.
Andy's toys are welcomed by the other toys at Sunnyside, and are given a tour of the seemingly perfect play-setting by Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear ("Lotso"), Big Baby, and Ken, with whom Barbie falls in love. All the toys choose to stay, except Woody, who attempts to return to Andy. Woody is found by Bonnie, one of the Sunnyside children, who takes him home and plays with him along with her other toys. Chuckles, a toy clown, tells Woody that he, Lotso and Big Baby were once owned by a girl named Daisy, but were lost during a trip. They traveled back to her house and find that Lotso had been replaced with an identical toy, causing Lotso to become embittered.
Meanwhile, the Sunnyside toddlers play roughly with Andy's toys. Buzz asks Lotso to have them moved to the older children's room, but is captured. Lotso, who controls Sunnyside with an iron fist, reveals he sends new toys to distract the toddlers to keep him and his henchmen safe, not caring whether the toys get broken in the process. Seeing promise in Buzz, he resets him to his original space ranger persona, wiping his memory. Meanwhile, Mrs. Potato Head, through an eye she lost in Andy's room, sees Andy searching for the toys and convinces the toys that Woody told the truth. Before they can leave, Andy's toys are imprisoned by Lotso's gang.
Woody returns to Sunnyside and reconciles with his friends. That evening, the toys formulate an escape plan, and inadvertently reset Buzz to Spanish mode. Buzz immediately allies himself with Woody and falls in love with Jessie. The toys reach the nearby dumpster but are caught by Lotso and his gang. As a garbage truck approaches, Woody reveals what he learned about Lotso. Lotso says that he now believes toys are meant to be thrown away, leading an enraged Big Baby to throw Lotso into the dumpster. Lotso pulls Woody into the dumpster just as the truck collects the trash. Woody's friends fall into the back of the truck while trying to rescue him, and a falling television hits Buzz, restoring his memory and normal persona.
The toys are brought to a local landfill, where they find themselves on a conveyor belt leading to an incinerator. Woody and Buzz help Lotso reach an emergency stop button, but Lotso abandons them. As the toys accept their impending fate, the Aliens rescue them with the landfill's industrial claw. Lotso escapes, but a garbage truck driver finds and straps him to his truck's radiator grille. Woody and his friends ride another garbage truck, driven by an adult Sid Phillips, back to Andy's house.
Woody leaves a note for Andy, and thinking the note is from his mother, donates the toys to Bonnie. Andy introduces the toys individually to Bonnie and is surprised to find Woody at the bottom of the donation box. Bonnie recognizes him and, though initially hesitant, Andy passes Woody on to her. Andy plays with Bonnie before leaving; Woody bids him a quiet farewell, and the toys begin their new life with Bonnie.
Later, Woody and the other toys learn that Barbie, Ken and Big Baby have improved the lives of the toys at Sunnyside.