

Mexico storyline
In Mexico, police officer Javier Rodriguez and his partner Manolo Sanchez stop a drug transport and arrest the couriers. General Salazar, a high-ranking Mexican official, interrupts their arrest to offer Javier a special new assignment. Salazar instructs him to apprehend Francisco Flores, a hitman for the Tijuana Cartel, headed by the Obregón brothers.
In Tijuana, under torture, Flores gives Salazar the names of important members of the Obregón cartel, who are arrested. Javier and Salazar's efforts eventually cripple the Obregón brothers' cocaine outfit, but Javier soon discovers that Salazar is a pawn of the Juárez Cartel, the Obregón brothers' chief rival. It's revealed that Salazar's anti-drug campaign is a fraud, and his true goal is actually to wipe out the Juárez Cartel's competitors. 
Sanchez attempts to sell information about Salazar's true affiliation to the Drug Enforcement Administration, but Salazar discovers his plot and has him murdered in the desert while Javier is forced to watch. No longer able to handle working for Salazar, Javier arranges a deal with the DEA to testify against him. In exchange for his testimony, Javier requests electricity in his neighborhood so that the local children can play baseball at night rather than be tempted by street gangs and crime. Salazar's secrets are revealed, and he is arrested.
Javier makes a statement to the media about the widespread corruption in the police force and army. Later, Javier watches as children play baseball at night in their new stadium.

Wakefield storyline
Robert Wakefield, a conservative Ohio judge, is appointed to head the President's Office of National Drug Control Policy, taking on the title of drug czar. His predecessor and several influential politicians warn Wakefield that the War on Drugs is unwinnable. Meanwhile, Robert's teenage daughter Caroline, an honors student, has been using cocaine, methamphetamine, and heroin, which develops into a drug addiction after her boyfriend Seth introduces her to freebasing. Caroline, Seth, and their friend Vanessa are all arrested when a fellow student overdoses on drugs, and they try to dump him anonymously at a hospital. Robert and his wife Barbara struggle to deal with Caroline's addiction, which Barbara has secretly known about for over six months.
Robert finds himself caught between his demanding new position and difficult family life. During a visit to Mexico, he is encouraged by Salazar's successful efforts in hurting the Obregón brothers. Returning to Ohio, Robert learns that Caroline has run away to Cincinnati after stealing money from her parents to pay for drugs, and no one knows her exact location.
Robert drags Seth along as he begins to search Cincinnati for his daughter. After a drug dealer who is prostituting Caroline refuses to reveal her whereabouts, Robert breaks into a seedy hotel room and finds a semi-conscious Caroline in the company of an older man. Later, he returns to Washington, D.C. to give his prepared speech on a "10-point plan" to win the War on Drugs, but falters halfway through the speech. Before exiting the conference, he tells the press that the War on Drugs implies a war on one's own family, which he cannot endorse. Later, Robert and Barbara attend a Narcotics Anonymous meeting with Caroline. When invited to introduce themselves to the group, Robert and Barbara tell the other attendees that they're "here to listen".

Ayala/DEA storyline
In San Diego, an undercover DEA investigation led by Montel Gordon and Ray Castro leads to the arrest of Eduardo Ruiz, a high-stakes dealer posing as a fisherman. Ruiz decides to take the road to immunity by giving up his boss: drug lord Carl Ayala, the biggest distributor for the Obregón brothers in the United States. Ayala is indicted by a tough prosecutor, hand-selected by Robert Wakefield to send a message to the Mexican drug organizations.
As the trial against Ayala begins, his pregnant wife Helena learns of her husband's true profession from his associate, Arnie Metzger. Facing the prospect of life imprisonment for her husband and death threats against her only child, Helena decides to hire Francisco Flores to assassinate Eduardo Ruiz; she knows killing Ruiz will effectively end the trial nolle prosequi. Flores plants a car bomb on a DEA car in an assassination attempt against Ruiz. Shortly after planting the bomb, Flores is assassinated by a sniper in retaliation for his cooperation with General Salazar. The bomb meant to kill Ruiz instead kills Agent Castro. Gordon and Ruiz survive.
Knowing Ruiz is soon scheduled to testify, Helena makes a deal with drug lord Juan Obregón, who forgives the Ayala family's debt and has Ruiz poisoned. Ayala is released, much to the dissatisfaction of Gordon, who is still angry over Castro's death. Ayala eventually deduces that Metzger initially informed on Ruiz. In a bid for power with another drug cartel in Mexico, Metzger accepted $3 million to inform on Ruiz to the FBI and facilitate the Ayala organization's downfall. According to Ayala, Metzger was planning on taking over Ayala's empire completely. Metzger is later visited by two men with guns. Soon after Ayala's release, Gordon bursts into the Ayala home during his homecoming celebration. Bodyguards wrestle him to the ground, but Gordon surreptitiously plants a listening bug under Ayala's desk. Gordon is forced from the property, smiling as he walks away.
