Ten-year-old Carl Fredricksen idolizes famed explorer Charles Muntz, who is discredited when a giant bird skeleton he brought back from Paradise Falls in South America is deemed a fake. Muntz travels back to the falls, vowing to not return until he can bring back a live specimen.
Carl befriends Ellie, another young Muntz fan, who keeps a scrapbook of her adventures and dreams of moving her "clubhouse" (an abandoned house) to Paradise Falls. Carl and Ellie eventually marry, renovate the clubhouse and move in. They work at the city zoo as a balloon salesman and zookeeper, respectively. Ellie suffers a miscarriage, and it is implied that she cannot have children. Though the couple saves money for a trip to Paradise Falls, they must repeatedly spend their savings on more pressing needs. Many years later, a now elderly Carl decides to surprise Ellie with tickets to South America, but she falls ill and is hospitalized. Ellie gives Carl her scrapbook before she dies.
Now in his late 70s, Carl holds out while the neighborhood around him is redeveloped. After unintentionally injuring a construction worker, Carl is deemed a public menace by the court and ordered to move to an assisted living facility. However, Carl resolves to keep his promise to Ellie to move their house to Paradise Falls and attaches thousands of balloons to it to fly there. Russell, a young "Wilderness Explorer" scout attempting to earn his final merit badge, for assisting the elderly, becomes an accidental stowaway. Before Carl can land and send Russell home, a storm propels the house all the way to South America.
The house lands on a tepui opposite Paradise Falls. Carl and Russell harness themselves to the still-buoyant house and begin to tug it across the mesa. Along the way, they encounter a giant, flightless bird whom Russell names Kevin (but who they later realize is female), and Dug, a Golden Retriever whose collar has a device that translates his thoughts into human speech. After failed attempts to get rid of the animals, Carl reluctantly allows both to join the party.
A pack of dogs, all wearing collar translators, surrounds them. The dogs' master is revealed to be a 92-year-old Charles Muntz. Muntz invites Carl and Russell aboard his airship and talks about his quest to capture a bird. Carl's initial excitement over meeting his hero fades as he becomes aware that Muntz's obsession has driven him insane. After Muntz shows them a skeleton of the bird, Russell notes its resemblance to Kevin. Turning hostile, Muntz implies that he has murdered other travelers he suspected of also seeking the bird. Carl, Russell, and Dug flee, pursued by Muntz's dogs; they are rescued by Kevin, who gets injured in the process.
Hearing Kevin call out to her chicks, Carl agrees to take her home. However, Muntz captures her and starts a fire beneath Carl's home. Forced to choose, Carl saves his home, allowing Muntz to take Kevin away. Russell is distraught, and Dug leaves.
Disheartened, Carl looks through his wife's scrapbook and discovers that, before her death, she filled in blank pages with photos of their life together and wrote "Thanks for the adventure – now go have a new one!" Reinvigorated, he goes outside, only to see Russell setting out after Kevin using balloons and a leaf blower. Carl lightens his house by throwing out furniture and keepsakes, enabling it to fly again.
Russell arrives at Muntz's airship, but is caught. Carl and Dug, who had been hiding on Carl's back porch, board the dirigible and free him and Kevin. Muntz pursues them and traps Russell, Kevin and Dug inside the house. Carl saves them just as the tether breaks. Muntz leaps after them, but his leg gets tangled in balloon strings, and he falls to his death. The house descends out of sight beneath the clouds.
Carl and Russell reunite Kevin with her chicks before returning home in Muntz's airship. Russell receives his "Assisting the Elderly" badge, and Carl presents Russell with a grape soda bottle cap Ellie gave Carl when they first met, which he dubs "The Ellie Badge". Unbeknownst to Carl, the house lands on the cliff overlooking Paradise Falls, fulfilling his promise to Ellie.
