In 1957, the Jets, a gang of white youths, fight the Sharks, a gang of Puerto Rican youths, for control of San Juan Hill on Manhattan's Upper West Side. NYPD Lieutenant Schrank tells the gangs that their conflict is pointless, since the neighborhood will soon be demolished to make way for Lincoln Center. The gangs are too proud to care, and Jet leader Riff proposes a rumble between the two gangs. Riff approaches his friend Tony, who is on parole, for help. Tony refuses, wishing to reform with the help of Valentina, the Puerto Rican owner of Doc's general store. Meanwhile, María, Shark leader Bernardo's sister, is betrothed to Bernardo's friend Chino but yearns for independence. At a neighborhood dance at the community center that night, Tony and María meet and fall in love. This angers Bernardo, who then agrees to Riff's terms for a rumble if Tony attends. After the dance, Tony confesses his love to María on her fire escape, and they promise to see each other the next day.
Bernardo and his girlfriend Anita argue about life in New York compared to Puerto Rico; Anita's belief in the American Dream contrasts with Bernardo's pessimism. Police officers interrogate the Jets about the rumble, but they deny any knowledge. During their date at the Cloisters, Tony reveals to María that his year-long imprisonment for nearly beating a rival gang member to death had scared him into reforming. María makes Tony promise to stop the rumble, and they pledge their love to one another. Tony tries to convince Riff to call off the rumble by stealing his newly bought gun, but the Jets steal it back, with Riff reasserting that the rumble will happen as scheduled. Schrank orders Sergeant Krupke and other police officers to stop the rumble from occurring, but they are unsuccessful. 
At the rumble, Tony attempts to intervene and explains himself to Bernardo, who uses his boxing skills to moderately injure Tony. However, Tony refuses to fight until Bernardo appears to go after Riff. Tony punches Bernardo several times but decides not to knock him unconscious. Unwilling to let Tony walk away, Bernardo goes after him and grabs his knife while Riff grabs his own. After a brief duel, Bernardo fatally stabs Riff. Tony fatally stabs Bernardo in a fit of rage. The gangs flee when the police arrive, and Chino finds Riff's gun.
María gushes about her love for Tony to her co-workers in the late-night cleaning crew at the Gimbels department store. Once their shift is over, María sees Chino, who approaches her and reveals that Tony killed Bernardo; this horrifies her. When María meets Tony later, she is furious with him but refuses to let him confess to the police, as she still loves him. They plan to run away together. Valentina learns of Bernardo and Riff's deaths and laments the situation while recalling her interracial relationship with her deceased white husband. Meanwhile, Chino plans to kill Tony, but the Sharks advise him against it.
After identifying Bernardo's body at the morgue, Anita returns home and sees María and Tony together as he leaves the apartment. Anita argues with María but eventually accepts that María and Tony are in love. While Schrank interrogates María about Tony's whereabouts, María tells Anita to warn Tony about Chino's plan. Anita goes to Doc's and encounters the Jets, who shout racial slurs and attempt to gang-rape her until Valentina intervenes. Traumatized, Anita calls Valentina a traitor for housing the Jets and spitefully claims that Chino killed María. Additionally, Anita vows to move back to Puerto Rico. Valentina condemns the Jets, who disperse in shame.
Valentina relays Anita's message to Tony, who runs into the streets, begging for Chino to kill him. As María arrives, Chino emerges and shoots Tony, who dies in María's arms. Devastated, María takes the gun and aims it at the gathered Jets and Sharks, berating them for the senseless deaths their conflict caused, before tearfully dropping the gun. As the police arrive to arrest Chino, the gangs come together to carry Tony's body into Doc's, with María following.
