An Amish community outside Lancaster, Pennsylvania, attends the funeral of Jacob Lapp, who leaves behind his wife, Rachel, and eight-year-old son, Samuel. Rachel and Samuel travel by train to visit Rachel's sister, which takes them into Philadelphia. While at the 30th Street Station waiting for a connecting train, Samuel goes into the men's room and witnesses the murder of an undercover police officer.
Detective Sergeant John Book and his partner, Sergeant Elton Carter, are assigned to the case. They question Samuel, who is unable to identify the perpetrator from mugshots or a lineup. Samuel then sees a newspaper clipping in a trophy case of narcotics officer Lieutenant James McFee receiving an award and points him out to Book as the murderer.
Book investigates McFee and finds out that he was previously responsible for a seizure of expensive chemicals used to make black-market amphetamines, after which the chemicals disappeared. Book surmises that McFee sold the chemicals to drug dealers, and that the murdered police officer was investigating this. Book expresses his suspicions to Chief of Police Paul Schaeffer, who advises Book to keep the case secret so that they can determine how to proceed. Book is later ambushed in his apartment parking garage by McFee who shoots and wounds him before fleeing. Since only Schaeffer knew of Book's suspicions, Book realizes that Schaeffer is also corrupt and must have tipped off McFee.
Knowing that Samuel and Rachel are now in danger, Book orders Carter to hide the police files on Rachel and Samuel. He then drives them back to their farm. While beginning his drive back to Philadelphia, he passes out from his wounds and crashes into their birdhouse. Rachel insists that he be taken to a hospital, but Book refuses and states that going to a hospital would allow him to be found and put Rachel and Samuel back in danger. Rachel's father-in-law, Eli, reluctantly agrees to shelter him.
Book slowly recovers in their care and begins to blend into the Amish community and lifestyle. He and Rachel develop feelings for each other. This becomes a source of friction for Daniel Hochleitner, a neighbor of the Lapps, who had hoped to court Rachel after her husband's death. Book's relationship with the Amish community deepens as they learn that he is skilled at carpentry and seems like a decent, hard-working man. He is invited to participate in a barn raising for a newly-married couple, gaining Hochleitner's respect. However, the attraction between Book and Rachel is evident and causes gossip in the tight-knit community. 
Meanwhile, Schaeffer searches for Book by contacting authorities in the Amish area. Since Amish communities have no modern means of communication and little contact with the outside world, he hits repeated dead ends.
When Book goes into town with Eli to use a payphone to call his precinct, he learns that Carter was killed in the line of duty. Realizing that Schaeffer was behind it, Book calls him, chastises him for being corrupt and threatens to kill him. As they leave town, a group of locals harass the Amish. Book retaliates, breaking with the Amish tradition of non-violence. The assault is reported to the local police, and word eventually gets back to Schaeffer.
Upset with Book over the assault, Eli orders Book to leave. Rachel approaches Book in a field, where they passionately embrace. Soon after, Schaeffer, McFee and another corrupt cop, Sergeant Leon "Fergie" Ferguson, arrive at the Lapp farm. They take Rachel and Eli hostage. Eli manages to alert Book, and Book tells Samuel to hide at Hochleitner's farm. Book tricks Ferguson into the corn silo and suffocates him under tons of corn. He then uses Ferguson's shotgun to kill McFee. Schaeffer holds Rachel and Eli at gunpoint, but Samuel secretly comes back to ring the Lapp farm's bell. Book confronts Schaeffer, who threatens to kill Rachel, but the bell has alerted and summoned all of the neighbors. With so many witnesses present, Schaeffer surrenders and is later arrested.
With Rachel and Samuel no longer in danger, Book departs for Philadelphia. As he's about to drive off, Eli wishes him well by saying, "You be careful out there among them English.”
