Tess McGill is a working-class woman from Staten Island who dreams of climbing the corporate ladder to an executive position. Despite holding a business degree earned through years of evening classes, her boss and male co-workers at the stockbroker firm in lower Manhattan where she works as a secretary treat her like a bimbo, even though they benefit from her intelligence and business instincts. After reaching her limit with her boss's humiliations, Tess dramatically quits.
Tess then lands a job as an administrative assistant to Katharine Parker, a young associate in Mergers and Acquisitions. Katharine seems supportive, though condescending, toward Tess, encouraging her to learn from her and share her ideas. When Tess shares her idea for a proposed purchase of a radio network by Trask Industries, Katharine is skeptical that Tess could have come up with it herself and agrees to look into it. She later tells Tess it will not work out.
When Katharine breaks her leg skiing, she asks Tess to house-sit. While there, Tess discovers meeting notes that reveal Katharine plans to pass off the Trask Industries idea as her own. She then returns home to find her live-in boyfriend, Mick, having sex with another woman. Doubly heartbroken, Tess decides to use Katharine's office and connections to present herself as an executive and move forward with the Trask merger. She schedules a meeting with Jack Trainer, a mergers and acquisitions associate from another company.
The night before the meeting, Tess has her friend Cyn cut her hair to look more professional. She also begins borrowing Katharine's more stylish and expensive clothing to dress the part. In an attempt to meet Jack Trainer prior to the meeting, Tess attends a dinner on Katharine’s behalf, hosted by his firm. Jack is attracted to and approaches Tess at the bar but does not reveal his name, even after she inquires whether he knows Jack Trainer. Tess eventually leaves and he follows, taking her back to his apartment after she passes out in a cab from a combination of Valium and alcohol. 
Tess leaves early the next morning, believing them to have slept together, to attend her meeting with Jack and is surprised to see he is the man from the previous night. They both feign non-recognition. Although Tess lacks confidence during the meeting with Jack and his associates and leaves thinking it was a failure, Jack soon arrives at her office, telling her they did not sleep together and that he wants to move forward with her idea. Together, they prepare the financials for the merger proposal. Jack is initially confused by Tess's apparently unorthodox methods of doing business, such as approaching Trask at his daughter's wedding to get around his various corporate associates, but comes to find her exciting after years of feeling as though he's in a slump.
Trask agrees to go forward with the merger, and as Tess and Jack collaborate together, they fall in love and begin a relationship. While in bed with Jack, Tess is tempted to confess that she is a secretary, not an executive, but stops herself after discovering Jack is also involved with Katharine, whom he planned to break up with before her injury.
Katharine returns home on the day of the meeting finalizing the merger, and while Tess is helping her get settled, Katharine brings up the Trask merger, saying she was intending to take it to Jack and give Tess credit eventually, but was restricted due to Jack’s strict ethical code preventing him from looking at other’s work without verifying the source after being accused of stealing himself. Jack arrives, having reluctantly agreed to visit Katharine, and rejects her advances and suggestions that they marry, but stops short of ending the relationship. He leaves abruptly to get to the Trask meeting. Katharine discovers Tess's deception while looking through the appointment book Tess had left behind.
At the Trask meeting, Tess asks Jack whether he has ever been accused of stealing, which he denies. He confesses his love for Tess, but as the meeting begins, Katharine barges in and reveals Tess's deception, accusing her of stealing the merger idea. Feeling she can't defend herself, Tess leaves, apologizing profusely. Katharine takes Tess's place at the conference table.
Days later, Tess is clearing out her desk, having been fired, and encounters Jack in the lobby. He is going upstairs with Katharine and Trask to continue work on the merger. Katharine mocks Tess, leading to a confrontation. Jack defends Tess to Trask, demanding she be allowed to lead the merger. When Tess reveals there's a hole in the deal, Trask at last gives her a chance to explain and prove that the idea was hers. He in turn confronts Katharine, who is unable to do the same. He promises to have her fired for her actions and offers Tess an entry-level position, which she happily accepts. Tess and Jack embrace and renew their relationship.
On her first day at Trask, Tess arrives at her office and finds a woman, Alice, inside using the phone. She initially assumes she is Alice's secretary, but then realizes that Alice is, in fact, her secretary. Tess tells her they'll work together as colleagues, showing she will be very different from Katharine. Finally, Tess calls her friend Cyn from her own office to tell her she has made it.
