You Can't Take It with You (film)
Successful banker, Anthony P. Kirby, has just returned from Washington, D.C., where he was effectively granted a government-sanctioned munitions monopoly, which will make him very rich. He intends to buy a 12-block radius around a competitor's factory to put him out of business, but one household refuses to sell. Kirby instructs his real-estate broker, John Blakely, to offer the houshold a huge sum, and if they still refuse, to cause trouble for the family. Meanwhile, Grandpa Vanderhof convinces a bank accountant named Poppins to quit work and pursue his dream of making animated toys. 
Kirby's son, Tony, a vice president in the family company, has fallen in love with a company stenographer, Alice Sycamore. When Tony proposes marriage, Alice is worried that her family would be looked upon poorly by Tony's rich and famous family. In fact, Alice is the only relatively normal member of the eccentric Sycamore family, led by Vanderhof. Vanderhof describes the living arrangement as "lilies of the field" in that they engage in work they enjoy and run their own businesses. Granddaughter Essie makes and sells candy, her husband Ed Carmichael is a musician and printer, her father Paul manufactures fireworks in the basement with resident DePinna, and so on. Unbeknownst to the players, Alice's family lives in the house that will not sell. Vanderhof is protecting not only his property but the families and businesses in the twelve-block area Kirby wants.
Kirby and his wife strongly disapprove of Tony's choice for marriage. Tony not only loves Alice but feels she encourages his taste for spontaneous fun and farcical humor. Before she accepts, Alice forces Tony to bring his family to become better acquainted with their future in-laws, but when Tony purposely brings his family on the wrong day (reasoning that he would rather the two families meet as they are, not in a formal "stuffed-shirt" setting), the Sycamore family is caught off-guard, and the house is in disarray. As the Kirbys are preparing to leave after a rather disastrous meeting, the police arrive in response to what they perceive as printed threats on flyers, made by Ed as Independence Day promotions ("the revolution is coming", etc.) for Paul's fireworks. When the fireworks in the basement go off, they arrest everyone in the house.
Held in the drunk tank preparing to see the night-court judge, Mrs. Kirby repeatedly insults Alice and makes her feel unworthy of Tony, while Grandpa explains to Kirby the importance of having friends, and that despite all the wealth and success in business, "you can't take it with you". At the court hearing, the judge allows for Grandpa and his family to settle the charges for disturbing the peace and making illegal fireworks by assessing a fine, for which Grandpa's neighborhood friends pitch in to pay. He repeatedly asks why the Kirbys were at the Vanderhof house. When Grandpa, attempting to help Kirby, says it was to talk over selling the house, Alice has an outburst and says it was because she was engaged to Tony, but is spurning him because of how poorly she has been treated by his family. This causes a sensation in the papers, and Alice flees the city. 
With Alice gone, Grandpa decides to sell the house, thus meaning all his neighbors must vacate to prepare for building the new factory. Now, the Kirby companies merge, creating a huge fluctuation in the stock market and ruining Ramsey, Kirby's competitor. Ramsey dies after confronting Kirby for being ruthless and a failure of a man, saying he too will end up ruined, alone and friendless. Kirby realizes Ramsey is right, he is heading for the same fate, and leaves the meeting where the contract signing is scheduled to occur. Tony quietly confronts his father, saying he's quit the company and never wanted it in the first place.
As the Vanderhofs are vacating the house, Tony tries to speak with Alice. Kirby arrives and talks privately with Grandpa, sharing his realization. Grandpa responds by inviting him to play "Polly Wolly Doodle" on the harmonica that Kirby gave him. The two let loose with the rest of the family joining in the merriment, and Alice decides to reunite with Tony. Later, at the dinner table, Grandpa says grace for the Sycamore family and the Kirbys, revealing that Kirby has sold back the houses on the block.