A Soldier's Story
A Soldier's Story is a 1984 American mystery drama film directed and produced by Norman Jewison, adapted by Charles Fuller from his Pulitzer Prize-winning A Soldier's Play.  Fuller had said Herman Melville's novella Billy Budd inspired the play. It is a story about racism in a segregated regiment of the U.S Army commanded by White officers and training in the Jim Crow South, in a time and place where a Black officer is unprecedented and bitterly resented by nearly everyone, and follows an African-American JAG officer sent to investigate the murder of an African-American sergeant in Louisiana near the end of World War II.
The cast is led by Howard E. Rollins Jr. and Adolph Caesar (whose performance was nominated for a Best Supporting Actor Oscar). Other actors include Art Evans, David Alan Grier, Larry Riley, David Harris, Robert Townsend, Bob Swanson, and Patti LaBelle. Denzel Washington, still at the beginning of his career, appears in a supporting role. Several actors reprise their roles from the stage version.
The film was first shown at the Toronto International Film Festival. It won the New York Drama Critics Award, the Outer Critics Circle Award, the Theater Club Award, and three Village Voice Obie Awards. It won the Golden Prize at the 14th Moscow International Film Festival. It was also nominated for three Academy Awards: for Best Picture, Supporting Actor (Adolph Caesar), and Screenplay Adaptation (Fuller).


== Plot ==
In 1944 during World War II, Vernon Waters, a master sergeant in a company of Black soldiers, is shot to death with a .45 caliber pistol outside Fort Neal, a segregated Army base in Louisiana.  Captain Richard Davenport, a Black officer from the Judge Advocate General's Corps, is sent to investigate, against the wishes of commanding officer Colonel Nivens. Most assume Waters was killed by the local Ku Klux Klan, but others are doubtful.
Nivens gives Davenport three days to conduct his investigation. Even Captain Taylor, the only White officer in favor of a full investigation, is uncooperative and patronizing, fearing a Black officer will have little success. While some Black soldiers are proud to see one of their own wearing captain's bars, others are distrustful and evasive.
Davenport learns that Waters' company was officially part of the 221st Chemical Smoke Generator Battalion.  Though eager to serve their country, they are assigned menial jobs in deference to their white counterparts. Most are former players from the Negro baseball league, grouped as a unit to play ball with Waters as manager. Their success against white soldiers gives them a good deal of popularity, with talk of an exhibition game against the New York Yankees.
James Wilkie, a fellow sergeant Waters demoted for being drunk on duty, initially describes Waters as a strict disciplinarian, but also a fair, good-natured NCO who got on well with the men, especially the jovial and well-liked C.J. Memphis. Davenport uncovers Waters' true tyrannical nature and his disgust with fellow Black soldiers, particularly those from the rural South.
Private Peterson reveals he stood up to Waters when he berated the men after a winning game. Waters challenged Peterson to a fight and beat him badly. Interviewing other soldiers, Davenport learns that Waters charged C.J. with the murder of a white MP, after a search conducted by Wilkie turned up a recently discharged pistol under C.J.'s bunk. Waters provoked C.J. into striking him, whereupon the weapons charge was dismissed and C.J. was charged with striking a superior officer.
When C.J.'s best friend Corporal Cobb visits him in jail, C.J. is suffering from intense claustrophobia and tells Cobb of a visit from Waters, who admitted it was a set-up Waters had done to others. Davenport learns from Cobb that C.J., awaiting trial, hanged himself. In protest, the platoon deliberately lost the season's last game, and Waters was shaken by the suicide. Taylor disbanded the team, and the players were assigned to the 221st.
Davenport learns that white officers Captain Wilcox and Lieutenant Byrd had an altercation with Waters shortly before his death. Both officers admit to assaulting Waters when he confronted them in a drunken tirade, but deny killing him as they had not been issued .45 ammunition. Though Taylor is convinced Wilcox and Byrd are lying, Davenport releases them.
Privates Peterson and Smalls go AWOL, and Davenport forces Wilkie to admit he planted the gun under C.J.'s bunk on Waters' orders. Waters had divulged his internalized racism to Wilkie, revealing that during World War I, he helped lynch a Black soldier who humiliated them in front of French civilians. Before the lynching victims antics some of the white French women had been willing to go with them on dates.  Davenport asks why Waters did not target Peterson because of their fight, and Wilkie explains that Waters liked and respected Peterson, because Peterson stood up for himself. Davenport has Wilkie arrested just as an impromptu celebration begins, as the platoon is to be shipped out to join the fight overseas.
Realizing Peterson and Smalls were on guard duty the night of Waters' murder, and thus had been issued .45 ammunition for their pistols, Davenport interrogates Smalls, found by the MPs. Smalls confesses Peterson killed Sergeant Waters, as revenge for C.J.'s death. Captured and brought to the interrogation room, Peterson confesses to the murder, saying "I didn't kill much. Some things need getting rid of”, to which Davenport retorts “Who gave you the right to judge who is fit to be a Negro?”
Taylor congratulates Davenport, admitting that he will have to get used to Negroes being in charge. Davenport assures Taylor that he will get used to it – "You can bet your ass on that," he adds, as the platoon marches in preparation for their deployment to the European theatre.


== Cast ==

Sources:


== Production ==
Jewison and many of the cast members worked for scale or less under a tight budget with Columbia Pictures. "No one really wanted to make this movie... a black story, it was based on World War II, and those themes were not popular at the box office", according to Jewison. Warner Bros. turned it down, as did Universal and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Columbia's Frank Price read the screenplay and was deeply interested, but the studio was hesitant about its commercial value, so Jewison offered to do the film for a $5 million budget and no salary. When the Directors Guild of America insisted he must have a fee, he agreed to take the lowest possible amount. The film ended up grossing $22.1 million.Howard E. Rollins, Jr. had just received an Oscar nomination for his role in Ragtime and was cast as the lead. Most of the cast came from Broadway careers, but only Adolph Caesar, Denzel Washington, Larry Riley and William Allen Young appeared in both the movie and the original off-Broadway play with the Negro Ensemble Company in the New York City version.
A Soldier's Story was shot entirely in Arkansas. The "Tynin" exterior scenes were shot in three days in Clarendon. The baseball sequence was filmed in Little Rock at the historic Lamar Porter Field.Bill Clinton (then Governor of Arkansas) dropped by during the shooting. He became very enthused about the project and later helped by providing the Arkansas Army National Guard in full regalia for a grand scene, since Jewison could not afford to pay an army of extras. Production was completed with their help at Fort Chaffee United States Army Ready Reserve base at Fort Smith.


== Reception ==
The film holds a 92% rating on Rotten Tomatoes from a sample of 20 critics. The site's consensus reads, "A meticulously crafted murder mystery with incisive observations about race in America, A Soldier's Story benefits from a roundly excellent ensemble and Charles Fuller's politically urgent screenplay".


== Accolades ==
Academy Award for Best Picture (Nominated)
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay – Charles Fuller (Nominated)
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor – Adolph Caesar (Nominated)
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures – Norman Jewison (Nominated)
Edgar Award, Best Motion Picture Screenplay – Charles Fuller (Won)
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Drama (Nominated)
Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay - Motion Picture – Charles Fuller (Nominated)
Golden Globe Award Best Actor in a Supporting Role in a Motion Picture – Adolph Caesar (Nominated)
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards, Best Supporting Actor – Adolph Caesar (Won)
14th Moscow International Film Festival – Golden Prize (Won)
NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Motion Picture (Won)
Writers Guild of America for Best Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium – Charles Fuller (Nominated)


== References ==


== External links ==
A Soldier's Story at IMDb
A Soldier's Story at the TCM Movie Database
A Soldier's Story at AllMovie
A Soldier's Story at the American Film Institute Catalog
A Soldier's Story at Rotten Tomatoes...And Justice for All (film)
.45 caliber pistol
12 Years a Slave (film)
14th Moscow International Film Festival
40 Pounds of Trouble
8½
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
AWOL
A House Divided: Denmark Vesey's Rebellion
A Soldier's Play
A Soldier's Story (2015 film)
A Time to Kill (1996 film)
About Sara
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Awards
Adolph Caesar
Affection (film)
African-American culture
African-American history
African Americans
Afro-American religion
Agnes of God (film)
Ali (film)
AllMovie
Alsino and the Condor
Amok (1983 film)
An Officer and a Gentleman
Antwone Fisher (film)
Arkansas
Arkansas Army National Guard
Art Evans (actor)
As Simple as That (film)
Atlantic slave trade
Bad Boys for Life
Baga people
Beaufort, South Carolina
Best Friends (1982 film)
Bilali Document
Bill Clinton
Billy Budd
Black Church (African American)
Black Panther: Wakanda Forever
Black Panther (film)
Black cat bone
Bogus (film)
Boo Hag
Boyz n the Hood
Broadway theatre
Bruh Rabbit and the Tar Baby Girl
Bunce Island
Bustin' Loose (film)
Camera Buff
Charles Fuller
Charleston red rice
Christ Stopped at Eboli (film)
Clarendon, Arkansas
Claustrophobia
Clear Skies (film)
Columbia Pictures
Come and See
Coming to America
Confessions of a Police Captain
Conrack
Crash (2004 film)
Culture of Africa
Daufuskie Island
Daughter (2016 film)
Daughters of the Dust
David Alan Grier
David Harris (American actor)
Dennis Lipscomb
Denzel Washington
Dersu Uzala (1975 film)
Dinner with Friends (film)
Directors Guild of America
Drama (film and television)
Dreaming of Space
Edgar Award
Eulonia, Georgia
European theatre of World War II
F.I.S.T. (film)
Fame (1980 film)
Fate of a Man
Father (1966 film)
Fiddler on the Roof (film)
Flying Africans
For Colored Girls
Fort Chaffee
Fort Smith, Arkansas
Foul Play (1977 film)
Frank Price
Fula people
Gaily, Gaily
Georgia (U.S. state)
Girls Trip
Glory (1989 film)
Golden Globe
Golden Isles of Georgia
Goofer dust
Gullah
Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Corridor
Gullah Gullah Island
Gullah language
Haint blue
Herbie Hancock
Herman Melville
Hermano (film)
Hidden Figures
History of Angola
History of Benin
History of Ghana
History of Guinea-Bissau
History of Liberia
History of Nigeria
History of Senegal
History of Sierra Leone
History of the Gambia
History of the Republic of the Congo
History of the United States
Hog Hammock, Georgia
Hoodoo (folk magic)
Hot foot powder
How Stella Got Her Groove Back
Howard E. Rollins, Jr.
Howard E. Rollins Jr.
Howard Rollins
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
Igbo Landing
Igbo people
In Country
In the Heat of the Night (film)
Internalized racism
Intervista
JSTOR (identifier)
Jesus Christ Superstar (film)
Jim Crow laws
John Hancock (actor)
John the Conqueror
Jola people
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Julia Jackson
Junkhearts
Just Mercy
Kissi people
Kongo people
Kpelle people
Ku Klux Klan
Kumbaya
Lady Sings the Blues (film)
Lamar Porter Field
Larry Riley (actor)
Lean on Me (film)
Let's Do It Again (1975 film)
Lethal Weapon
Life as a Fatal Sexually Transmitted Disease
Limba people (Sierra Leone)
Little Rock, Arkansas
Live Today, Die Tomorrow!
Los Angeles Film Critics Association
Losers (film)
Louisiana
Lucía
Malcolm X (1992 film)
Mandinka people
Mark Warner (film editor)
Marvin's Room (film)
Master sergeant
Me Ivan, You Abraham
Mende people
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Michael Row the Boat Ashore
Mike Williams (boxer)
Military reserve
Mimino
Mojo (African-American culture)
Moonstruck
Moscow International Film Festival
My Man (2014 film)
Mystery film
NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Motion Picture
Negro Ensemble Company
Negro baseball league
New York City
New York Yankees
Niominka people
Norman Jewison
O Homem que Virou Suco
Obie Award
Only You (1994 film)
Other People's Money
Our Own (2004 film)
Outer Critics Circle Award
Palor people
Particle (film)
Patti LaBelle
Pete on the Way to Heaven
Port Royal Experiment
Precious (film)
Pulitzer Prize
Rabbit's foot
Racial segregation
Ragtime (film)
Ranky Tanky
Ray (film)
Red Tails
Remember the Titans
Resurrection (2001 film)
Ring shout
Robert Townsend (actor)
Robot Hive/Exodus
Rollerball (1975 film)
Ronald L. Schwary
Rotten Tomatoes
Russell Boyd
Saafi people
Sahel
Sapelo Island
Scott Paulin
Selma (film)
Send Me No Flowers
Senegambia Confederation
Serafino (film)
Serer-Laalaa
Serer-Ndut people
Serer-Noon
Serer people
Seven Days in January
Sister Act
Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses
Slavery in the United States
Soul Food (film)
South Carolina Lowcountry
Spotted Dog Running at the Edge of the Sea
Stono Rebellion
Straight Outta Compton (film)
Susu people
Teheran 43
Temne people
That Sweet Word: Liberty!
The Abandoned Field: Free Fire Zone
The Art of Love (1965 film)
The Believer (2001 film)
The Best Man (1999 film)
The Cincinnati Kid
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Descent of the Nine
The End of a Mystery
The Fifth Seal
The Fighting Temptations
The Great Debaters
The Greatest (1977 film)
The Harder They Fall (2021 film)
The Help (film)
The Hurricane (1999 film)
The Icicle Thief
The Journalist (1967 film)
The Lord Eagle
The Million Dollar Incident
The Naked Island
The Promised Land (1975 film)
The Pursuit of Happyness
The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming
The Secret Life of Bees (film)
The Statement (film)
The Thomas Crown Affair (1968 film)
The Thrill of It All (film)
The White Bird Marked with Black
Timeline of African-American history
Toronto International Film Festival
Toucouleur people
Travelling with Pets
Trey Wilson
Turner Classic Movies
Twenty Hours
United States Army
Universal Studios
Vai people
Vassa (film)
Vibration Cooking
Village Voice
Waiting to Exhale
War and Peace (film series)
Warner Bros.
We'll Live Till Monday
We All Loved Each Other So Much
Will to Live
William Allen Young
Wings Hauser
Wolof people
World War II
Writers Guild of America
Yuan Shang (film)
http://www.moscowfilmfestival.ru/miff34/eng/archives/?year=1985
https://web.archive.org/web/20130316084353/http://moscowfilmfestival.ru/miff34/eng/archives/?year=1985
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0088146/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/a_soldiers_story
https://archive.org/details/shotonthissitetr00gord/page/146
https://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=soldiersstory.htm
https://www.the-numbers.com/movies/1984/0SLST.php
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/MovieDetails/57197
https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b6e321367
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/53021/enwp
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v45520
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/57197
https://www.jstor.org/stable/41398468
https://web.archive.org/web/20181230023321/http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b6e321367
