America America
America America (British title The Anatolian Smile—a reference to an ongoing acknowledgment of the character Stavros' captivating smile) is a 1963 American drama film directed, produced and written by Elia Kazan, adapted from his own book, published in 1962.
Inspired by the life of his uncle, Avraam Elia Kazantzoglou, Kazan used little-known cast members, with the entire story line revolving around the central performance of Greek actor Stathis Giallelis, twenty-one years old at the time of production, who is in virtually every scene of the nearly three-hour movie. America America is one of Martin Scorsese’s favorite films. In 2001, America, America was included in the annual selection of 25 motion pictures added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and recommended for preservation.


== Plot ==
In the late 1890s, Cappadocian Greek Stavros Topouzoglou (Giallelis) lives in an impoverished village below Mount Argaeus in Ottoman Turkey. The life of the Cappadocian Greeks and Armenians of Kayseri is depicted, including the Derinkuyu Underground City traditional cliff cave dwellings in which Stavros' grandmother lives.
Stavros witnesses the Hamidian massacres against Armenians which leave his friend, Vartan, dead. Vartan and Stavros had been planning to go to America together. Stavros is nearly imprisoned after trying to recover Vartan's corpse. Knowing that the Greeks won't remain safe from violence forever, the family sends Stavros to Constantionople. Stavros is entrusted by his father with the family's financial resources in a mission of hope to the Turkish capital Constantinople (renamed Istanbul in 1930), where he is to work in the carpet business of his father's cousin (Harry Davis), although his own dream is to reach the faraway land of opportunity – America.
His odyssey begins with a long voyage on a donkey and on foot through the impoverished towns and villages on the way to Constantinople. Out of his naivete, he loses all the money and arrives at the cousin's home penniless. The older man is deeply disappointed at this turn of events since he was counting on the infusion of funds to rescue his failing carpet store. Nevertheless, he attempts to salvage the situation by proposing that Stavros marry a wealthy merchant's (Paul Mann) young daughter (Linda Marsh). Stavros realizes that such a marriage would mean the end of his American dream and adamantly refuses, abruptly leaving the angry cousin.
Now homeless on the streets of the capital, Stavros survives by eating discarded food and working at backbreaking and hazardous jobs. After nearly a year of scrimping and self-denial, he has some savings, but his first sexual encounter with a young prostitute (Joanna Frank) leaves him, once again, penniless. Sinking even lower, he now finds himself living in an overcrowded subterranean hovel, which becomes a scene of chaos and bloodshed when it is attacked with gunfire by authorities purportedly searching for anarchists and revolutionaries. Severely injured in the mayhem, the unconscious Stavros is thrown among piles of dead bodies slated for disposal into the sea. He subsequently topples from the cart transporting the bodies and painfully makes his way to the cousin's residence. The relative takes pity on the young man and allows him to recover at his home. Deprived now of all resistance, Stavros agrees to marry his intended bride. Upon being questioned by her regarding his moodiness, however, he admits that he still plans to emigrate to America, using the dowry money to pay for his passage.
At this point Stavros becomes reacquainted with Hohannes (Gregory Rozakis), a young Armenian, whom Stavros aided with food and clothing during his original voyage to Istanbul. Hohannes informs him that he is being sponsored to America by an employer seeking labor. Stavros manages to secure his own passage with the aid of the middle-aged wife (Katharine Balfour) of wealthy Armenian-American businessman Artoon Kebabian (Robert H. Harris), a client of his prospective father-in-law.  He tells his intended bride that he cannot marry her, and subsequently embarks on the voyage on board SS Kaiser Wilhelm.
There is, however, another major impediment. Kebabian, enraged to learn of a shipboard affair between his wife and Stavros, lodges a criminal complaint against him and rescinds his offer of a job in America, threatening Stavros with deportation back to Turkey. However, as everything looks bleak, Hohannes, who is discovered by the immigration services to be afflicted with tuberculosis, jumps off the ship out of the realization he can never enter America. This sacrifice enables Stavros to take Hohannes' place.
With the climactic image of the Statue of Liberty as the boatload of immigrants docks in New York Harbor, Stavros puts his tribulations behind him, starting out as a shoeshine boy and gathering the pennies and dollars that will eventually bring his family to the land where their descendants, including Elia Kazan, will have the chance to fulfill their potential.


== Elia Kazan's closing narration ==
"And he did bring them. It took a number of years, but one by one, he brought them here. Except for his father. That old man died where he was born.
"This film was made in Turkey and Greece.
"It was photographed by Haskell Wexler. It was edited by Dede Allen. The production designer was Gene Callahan. The costuming by Anna Hill Johnstone. The music was composed by Manos Hadjidakis. All under the management of Charles Maguire. And here are the actors: Stathis Giallelis, Frank Wolff, Harry Davis, Elena Karam, Estelle Hemsley, Gregory Rozakis, Lou Antonio, Salem Ludwig, John Marley, Joanna Frank, Paul Mann, Linda Marsh, Robert Harris, Katharine Balfour."


== Cast ==
Stathis Giallelis as Stavros Topouzoglou
Frank Wolff as Vartan Damadian
Harry Davis as Isaac Topouzoglou
Elena Karam as Vasso Topouzoglou
Estelle Hemsley as Grandmother Topouzoglou
Gregory Rozakis as Hohannes Gardashian
Lou Antonio as Abdul
Salem Ludwig as Odysseus Topouzoglou
John Marley as Garabet
Joanna Frank as Vartuhi
Paul Mann as Aleko Sinnikoglou
Linda Marsh  as Thomna Sinnikoglou
Robert H. Harris as Aratoon Kebabian
Katharine Balfour as Sophia KebabianUncredited:

Giorgos Foundas
Dimitris Nikolaidis


== Awards and nominations ==


== Production ==
The production, hampered by loss of its original financial backers, on-location hostility from Turkish authorities and onlookers, as well as other problems, continued into 1963. Powerful elements within Turkey came to be convinced that the country's national institutions and historical perspective upon turn of the 20th century events would be unfavorably portrayed by the Greek director and, when Kazan decided to transfer the troubled production to Greece, customs officials confiscated the cans of what they considered to be finished film, but owing to a prescient switch of labels between exposed and unexposed product, the valuable cargo survived.


== Technical details, premiere dates and DVD release ==
America America was filmed in 1.66:1 aspect ratio on 35-millimeter film and had its New York premiere on December 15, 1963. Kazan makes a voice-only introduction during the opening scenes, a short voice-only epilogue in the closing scene, and a voice-over recitation of the lead actors and technical personnel of the film. It was filmed on location at the Alfa Studios in Athens, Greece, as well in rural Greece, Istanbul, New York City, and at the Warner Bros. Studios in Hollywood. Between summer 1964 and spring 1965, it was seen in virtually every major Western European city. Its VHS release came on November 28, 1994, and a French (region 2) DVD boxed set (with Kazan's Baby Doll and A Face in the Crowd) was released on December 3, 2002. The film was finally released by Warner Bros. on DVD in the US on February 8, 2011.


== References ==


== External links ==
America America at IMDb 
America America at AllMovie
America America at the TCM Movie Database
America America at the American Film Institute Catalog
America America at Rotten Tomatoes
"America, America" essay by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010. ISBN 0826429777,  pp. 595–59621st Golden Globe Awards
36th Academy Awards
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Cab for Three
A Face in the Crowd (film)
A Letter to Elia
A Place in the World (film)
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
A Thousand Years of Good Prayers
A Tree Grows in Brooklyn (1945 film)
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Actors Studio
Alambrista!
Alfa Studios
AllMovie
America America (disambiguation)
An Unfinished Piece for Mechanical Piano
Anna Hill Johnstone
Armenians
Arturo's Island (film)
Autumn Marathon
Baby Doll
Bad Hair (2013 film)
Badlands (film)
Beginning (2020 film)
Between Two Waters
Blue Moon (2021 film)
Boomerang (1947 film)
Butterfly Wings (film)
Bwana (film)
Cappadocian Greeks
City of Life and Death
Claire's Knee
Constantinople
Cursed Mountain (film)
Days of Love
Dead of Summer (film)
Dede Allen
Demons in the Garden
Derinkuyu Underground City
Dimitris Nikolaidis
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Directors Guild of America Awards
Drama film
Días contados (film)
East of Eden (film)
Elia Kazan
Entre Nous (film)
Estelle Hemsley
Ewa chce spac
France
Frank Wolff (actor)
Furtivos
Gene Callahan
Gene Callahan (production designer)
Gentleman's Agreement
Giorgos Foundas
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Film Promoting International Understanding
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture
Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year – Actor
Golden Queen (film)
Golden Shell
Greek actor
Gregory Rozakis
Gun-shy
Gypsies Are Found Near Heaven
Half Moon (film)
Half of Heaven
Hamidian massacres
Haskell Wexler
Homer and Eddie
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Am Not Madame Bovary
I Was Happy Here
I Was a Parish Priest
In the House (film)
Istanbul
Joanna Frank
John Marley
Katharine Balfour
Kayseri
La nación clandestina
Letters from Alou
Library of Congress
Linda Marsh
Los pasos dobles
Lou Antonio
Mafioso (film)
Magical Girl (film)
Man on a Tightrope
Manos Hadjidakis
Margaret's Museum
Martin Scorsese
Mirage (1965 film)
Mon fils à moi
Mondays in the Sun
Mount Argaeus
National Film Registry
Neds (film)
New York City
New York Harbor
Oh! Sabella
On the Black Hill (film)
On the Waterfront
One-Eyed Jacks
Ottoman Turkey
Pacified (film)
Pandora's Box (2008 film)
Panic in the Streets (film)
Paul Mann
Peter Balakian
Pinky (film)
Robert H. Harris
Robert Harris (American actor)
Romeo, Juliet and Darkness
Rotten Tomatoes
Rumble Fish
SS Kaiser Wilhelm
Salem Ludwig
Salon (website)
San Sebastián International Film Festival
Sara (1992 film)
Senses of Cinema
Something Like Happiness
Sparrows (2015 film)
Splendor in the Grass
Stathis Giallelis
Statue of Liberty
Tales of Ordinary Madness
The Arrangement (film)
The Arrangement (novel)
The Beginning and the End (1993 film)
The Disaster Artist (film)
The Glass House (1972 film)
The Kings of the World
The Last Tycoon (1976 film)
The Long Day's Dying
The Nun's Story (film)
The Orchestra Conductor
The Railroad Man
The Rain People
The Ruination of Men
The Rye Horn
The Sea of Grass (film)
The Spirit of the Beehive
The Swindle (1997 film)
The Visitors (1972 film)
Trojan Eddie
Tuberculosis
Turner Classic Movies
Turtles Can Fly
Two for the Road (film)
Viva Zapata!
Warner Bros.
Wedding in Galilee
Western Europe
What's Life?
Wild River (film)
Wind with the Gone
Yesterday (1985 film)
http://www.salon.com/2015/04/23/elia_kazan_and_the_armenian_genocide_remembering_america_america/
http://sensesofcinema.com/2012/cteq/people-are-waiting-elia-kazan-and-america-america/
http://criterioncast.com/reviews/catherine-reviews-elia-kazans-america-america-dvd-review
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v83620
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0056825/
https://viaf.org/viaf/194773253
https://d-nb.info/gnd/7571148-5
https://www.idref.fr/177222468
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/22484
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/america-america-the-anatolian-smile
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb16591823t
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb16591823t
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1217057#identifiers
https://www.loc.gov/item/prn-01-184/national-film-registry-2001/2001-12-18/
https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/67218/enwp
https://books.google.com/books?id=deq3xI8OmCkC
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1217057#P345
