Argo (2012 film)
Argo is a 2012 American historical drama thriller film directed, produced by, and starring Ben Affleck. The screenplay, written by Chris Terrio, was adapted from the 1999 memoir The Master of Disguise by U.S. C.I.A. operative Tony Mendez and the 2007 Wired article "The Great Escape: How the CIA Used a Fake Sci-Fi Flick to Rescue Americans from Tehran" written by Joshuah Bearman and edited by Nicholas Thompson. The film deals with the "Canadian Caper", in which Mendez led the rescue of six U.S. diplomats from Tehran, Iran, under the guise of filming a science-fiction film during the 1979–1981 Iran hostage crisis.
The film, which also has Bryan Cranston, Alan Arkin, and John Goodman in supporting roles, was released in the United States on October 12, 2012. It was produced by Grant Heslov, Affleck, and George Clooney.
Argo was praised for the acting (particularly Arkin and Goodman's), Affleck's direction, Terrio's screenplay, the editing, and Desplat's score. Commentators and participants in the actual operation criticized failures in historical accuracy. The film received seven nominations at the 85th Academy Awards and won three, for Best Picture, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Film Editing.
The film also earned five Golden Globe Award nominations: it won Best Motion Picture – Drama and Best Director, and Alan Arkin was nominated for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture. It won Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture at the 19th Screen Actors Guild Awards, and Arkin was nominated for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role. It also won Best Film, Best Editing and Best Director at the 66th British Academy Film Awards, Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards for Best Screenplay, and 37th Hochi Film Award for Best International Picture.


== Plot ==
On November 4, 1979, Iranian Islamists storm the United States Embassy in Tehran in retaliation for President Jimmy Carter giving the Shah, an absolute monarch who was supported by Western powers, asylum in the U.S. during the Iranian Revolution, for cancer treatment. Sixty-six of the embassy staff are taken as hostages, but six avoid capture and are sheltered in the home of Canadian Ambassador Ken Taylor.
With the six escapees' situation kept secret, the U.S. State Department begins to explore options for exfiltrating them from Iran. Agent Tony Mendez, a U.S. Central Intelligence Agency exfiltration specialist, is brought in for a consultation. He criticizes the proposals but is at a loss when asked for an alternative. While on the phone with his son, he is inspired by watching Battle for the Planet of the Apes and begins plans for creating a cover story for the escapees: that they are Canadian filmmakers who are in Iran scouting exotic locations for a science-fiction film.
Mendez contacts John Chambers, a Hollywood make-up artist who had previously worked for the CIA. Chambers puts Mendez in touch with film producer Lester Siegel. Together, they set up a phony film production company, publicize their plans, and successfully establish the pretense of developing Argo, a "science fantasy adventure" in the style of Star Wars, to lend the cover story credibility. Meanwhile, the escapees grow restless. The revolutionaries reassemble embassy photographs shredded before the takeover and realize that some personnel are unaccounted for.
Posing as a producer for Argo, Mendez enters Iran under the alias Kevin Harkins and meets with the six escapees. He provides them with Canadian passports and fake identities. Although afraid to trust Mendez's scheme, they reluctantly go along, knowing that he is risking his own life too. A scouting visit to the bazaar to maintain their cover story takes a bad turn when they are harassed by a hostile shopkeeper, but their Iranian culture contact hustles them away from the hostile crowd.
Mendez is told the operation has been cancelled in favor of a planned military rescue of the hostages. He pushes ahead anyway, forcing his boss, Deputy Director Jack O'Donnell to hastily re-obtain authorization for the mission and rebook their cancelled tickets on a Swissair flight. Tensions rise at the airport, where the escapees' new ticket reservations are confirmed only at the last minute, and the head guard's call to the fake production company in Hollywood is answered only at the last second. The escapees board the plane, and at about the same time, the airport authorities are alerted to the ruse. They try to stop them, but the plane is able to take off.
To protect the hostages remaining in Tehran from retaliation, all U.S. involvement in the rescue is suppressed, and full credit is given to the Canadian government and its ambassador (who shuts down the embassy and leaves Iran with his wife as the operation is underway). The ambassador's Iranian housekeeper, who had known about the Americans and lied to the revolutionaries to protect them, escapes to Iraq. Mendez is awarded the Intelligence Star, but due to the mission's classified nature, he receives the medal in secret and has to return it afterward. Mendez returns to his wife and son in Virginia.
The film ends by explaining what happened after the depicted events: the hostages were freed after 444 days, Mendez and Chambers remained friends until Chambers' death in 2001, Bill Clinton returned Mendez's star in 1997 after the Canadian Caper is declassified, and that he lives with his family in rural Maryland.
As the credits roll, President Jimmy Carter is heard commenting on the operation.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Argo is based on the "Canadian Caper" that took place during the Iran hostage crisis in 1979 and 1980. Chris Terrio wrote the screenplay based on Joshuah Bearman's 2007 article "How the CIA Used a Fake Sci-Fi Flick to Rescue Americans from Tehran," which was published in Wired. Affleck mentioned the influences for the film, which include Costa-Gavras's work, All the President's Men, The Killing of a Chinese Bookie, and The Battle of Algiers which served as references.In 2007, the producers George Clooney, Grant Heslov and David Klawans set up a project based on the article. Affleck's participation was announced in February 2011. The following June, Alan Arkin was the first person cast in the film. After the rest of the roles were cast, filming began in Los Angeles in August 2011. Additional filming took place in McLean, Virginia; Washington, D.C.; and Istanbul. The scene in which Mendez drives up to and walks into the CIA headquarters lobby was filmed with permission at the CIA's original headquarters building in Virginia; all other scenes set at the CIA were filmed in the basement of the Los Angeles Times Building.As a historical piece, the film made use of archival news footage from ABC, CBS and NBC; and included popular songs from the era, such as "Little T&A" by The Rolling Stones (an anachronism, as it was not released until the following year), "Sultans of Swing" by Dire Straits, "Dance the Night Away" by Van Halen and "When the Levee Breaks" by Led Zeppelin. For its part, Warner Bros. used its 1972–1984 production logo featuring the "Big W" logo designed by Saul Bass for Warner Communications to open the film and painted on its studio lot's famed water tower the logo of The Burbank Studios (the facility's name during the 1970s and 1980s when Warner shared it with Columbia Pictures).The screenplay used by the CIA to create their cover story was an adaptation of Roger Zelazny's 1967 novel Lord of Light. Producer Barry Geller had spearheaded an earlier attempt to produce the film using the original title. After that production attempt failed, the screenplay was renamed Argo and used by the CIA.According to Tony Mendez, Studio Six—the phony Hollywood production office he helped create at the core of the CIA plan—proved so convincing that even weeks after the rescue was complete and the office had folded, 26 scripts were delivered to its address, including one from Steven Spielberg.In April 2016, research by VICE, based on documents received under the Freedom of Information Act, revealed that the CIA's public relations arm was involved in the production of the 2012 Argo, just as it provided information to a number of other American entertainment productions (such as the well-established case of the 2012 film Zero Dark Thirty).


=== Music ===


== Release and reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Argo was acclaimed by critics, praising Ben Affleck's direction, the cast (especially Arkin and Goodman), the script, and the editing. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 96% of 364 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.4/10. The website's consensus reads: "Tense, exciting, and often darkly comic, Argo recreates a historical event with vivid attention to detail and finely wrought characters." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 86 out of 100, based on 45 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A+" on an A+ to F scale.Naming Argo one of the best 11 films of 2012, critic Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote: "Ben Affleck's seamless direction catapults him to the forefront of Hollywood filmmakers turning out thoughtful entertainment." The Washington Times said it felt "like a movie from an earlier era — less frenetic, less showy, more focused on narrative than sensation," but that the script included "too many characters that he doesn't quite develop."Writing in the Chicago Sun-Times, Roger Ebert said, 

The craft in this film is rare. It is so easy to manufacture a thriller from chases and gunfire, and so very hard to fine-tune it out of exquisite timing and a plot that's so clear to us we wonder why it isn't obvious to the Iranians. After all, who in their right mind would believe a space opera was being filmed in Iran during the hostage crisis?Ebert gave the film four out of four stars, calling it "spellbinding" and "surprisingly funny", and chose it as the best film of the year, the last film he would choose for this honor before his death in 2013. He also correctly predicted that it would win the Academy Award for Best Picture, following its presentation at the Toronto International Film Festival.Literary critic Stanley Fish says that the film is a standard caper film in which "some improbable task has to be pulled off by a combination of ingenuity, training, deception and luck." He goes on to describe the film's structure: "(1) the presentation of the scheme to reluctant and unimaginative superiors, (2) the transformation of a ragtag bunch of ne'er-do-wells and wackos into a coherent, coordinated unit and (3) the carrying out of the task."Although he thinks the film is good at building and sustaining suspense, he concludes,

This is one of those movies that depend on your not thinking much about it; for as soon as you reflect on what's happening rather than being swept up in the narrative flow, there doesn't seem much to it aside from the skill with which suspense is maintained despite the fact that you know in advance how it's going to turn out. ... Once the deed is successfully done, there's really nothing much to say, and anything that is said seems contrived. That is the virtue of an entertainment like this; it doesn't linger in the memory and provoke afterthoughts.


=== Reaction by Iranians ===
Abolhassan Banisadr, foreign minister and then president during the incident, argued that the movie does not take into account the fact that most of the cabinet members advocated freeing all the American personnel quickly. Jian Ghomeshi, a Canadian writer and radio figure of Iranian descent, thought the film had a "deeply troubling portrayal of the Iranian people." Ghomeshi asserted "among all the rave reviews, virtually no one in the mainstream media has called out [the] unbalanced depiction of an entire ethnic national group, and the broader implications of the portrait." He also suggested that the timing of the film was poor, as American and Iranian political relations were at a low point. University of Michigan history professor Juan Cole had a similar assessment, writing that the film's narrative fails to provide adequate historical context for the events it portrays, and such errors of omission lead all of the Iranian characters in the film to be depicted as ethnic stereotypes.A November 3, 2012 article in the Los Angeles Times claimed that the film had received very little attention in Tehran, though Masoumeh Ebtekar, who was the spokesperson of the students who took the hostages and called only "Tehran Mary" in the film's credits, said that the film did not show "the real reasons behind the event". The film also ignores the importance of the date of the Embassy takeover. Mark Bowden, in his book on the subject, noted that November 4 was recognized as National Students' Day to acknowledge the student protesters killed by the Shah's police the year before. He also pointed out that this was the same date that the Ayatollah Khomeini had been exiled 15 years before.Bootleg DVDs have become popular and are estimated at "several hundreds of thousands" of copies. Interpretations of the film's popularity in Iran have varied, ranging from the fact that the movie portrays the excesses of the revolution and the hostage crisis, which had been long glorified in Iran, to Iranians viewing it as a reminder of what caused the poor relations with America and the ensuing cost to Iran, decades after the embassy takeover. The high DVD sales suggests a form of silent protest against the government's ongoing hostility to relations with America.


=== Top ten lists ===
Professional reviewers ranked the film with other releases for 2012, as follows:


=== Box office ===
Argo earned $136 million in the United States, and $96.3 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $232.3 million.The film debuted in second place with $19.5 million, then made $16.4 million in its sophomore weekend. In its third weekend the film made $12.1 million, finishing in first place.


=== Home media ===
The film was released in North America on February 19, 2013, on DVD and Blu-ray Disc.


=== Accolades ===

The film was nominated for seven Academy Awards and won three, for Best Picture, Best Adapted Screenplay and Best Film Editing. Affleck was not nominated for Best Director, and following the announcement of the nominations, Bradley Cooper, who was nominated for his leading performance in Silver Linings Playbook, declared: "Ben Affleck got robbed." This opinion was shared by the ceremony's host Seth MacFarlane and Quentin Tarantino, whose film Django Unchained was nominated in several categories.Entertainment Weekly wrote about this controversy:

Standing in the Golden Globe pressroom with his directing trophy, Affleck acknowledged that it was frustrating not to get an Oscar nod when many felt he deserved one. But he's keeping a sense of humor. "I mean, I also didn't get the acting nomination," he pointed out. "And no one's saying I got snubbed there!"


== Historical inaccuracies ==


=== Canadian versus CIA roles ===
After the film was previewed at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival, many critics said that it unfairly glorified the CIA's role and minimized the Canadian government's role (particularly that of Ambassador Taylor) in the extraction operation. Maclean's asserted that "the movie rewrites history at Canada's expense, making Hollywood and the CIA the saga's heroic saviours while Taylor is demoted to a kindly concierge."The postscript text said that the CIA let Taylor take the credit for political purposes, which some critics thought implied that he did not deserve the accolades he received. In response to this criticism, Affleck changed the postscript text to read: "The involvement of the CIA complemented efforts of the Canadian embassy to free the six held in Tehran. To this day the story stands as an enduring model of international co-operation between governments." The Toronto Star wrote, "Even that hardly does Canada justice."
In a CNN interview, former U.S. president Jimmy Carter addressed the controversy: 

90% of the contributions to the ideas and the consummation of the plan was Canadian. And the movie gives almost full credit to the American CIA. And with that exception, the movie is very good. But Ben Affleck's character in the film was... only in Tehran a day and a half. And the main hero, in my opinion, was Ken Taylor, who was the Canadian ambassador who orchestrated the entire process.Taylor noted, "In reality, Canada was responsible for the six and the CIA was a junior partner. But I realize this is a movie and you have to keep the audience on the edge of their seats." In the film, Taylor is shown as having been ordered to close down the Canadian embassy. This did not happen, and the Canadians never considered abandoning the six Americans who had taken refuge under their protection.Affleck asserted: 

Because we say it's based on a true story, rather than this is a true story, we're allowed to take some dramatic license. There's a spirit of truth .... the kinds of things that are really important to be true are—for example, the relationship between the U.S. and Canada. The U.S. stood up collectively as a nation and said, "We like you, we appreciate you, we respect you, and we're in your debt."... There were folks who didn't want to stick their necks out and the Canadians did. They said, "We'll risk our diplomatic standing, our lives, by harboring six Americans because it's the right thing to do." Because of that, their lives were saved."
After his death, The Washington Post described Taylor as the "main hero" of the Iran hostage escape, quoting former president Jimmy Carter in doing so. In 1981, Taylor was presented with the Congressional Gold Medal by President Ronald Reagan. Nonetheless, the significance of his role was downplayed in the film.


=== British and New Zealand roles ===
Upon its release in October 2012, the film was criticized for its suggestion that British and New Zealand embassies had turned away the American diplomats in Tehran. In fact both embassies, together with the Canadians, helped the Americans. The British had initially hosted the American diplomats; however, the location was deemed unsafe as the British embassy itself had been targeted and surrounded by mobs and all involved officials from the various nations believed the Canadian ambassador's residence to be a safer location. 
New Zealand diplomats organized a place for the diplomats to hide if they needed to change their location, and drove the Americans to the airport when they made their escape from Tehran. British diplomats also assisted other American hostages beyond the escaped group of six. Bob Anders, the U.S. consular agent played in the film by Tate Donovan, said, "They put their lives on the line for us. We were all at risk. I hope no one in Britain will be offended by what's said in the film. The British were good to us and we're forever grateful."Sir John Graham, the then-British ambassador to Iran, said, 

My immediate reaction on hearing about this was one of outrage. I have since simmered down, but am still very distressed that the film-makers should have got it so wrong. My concern is that the inaccurate account should not enter the mythology of the events in Tehran in November 1979." The then-British chargé d'affaires in Tehran said that, had the Americans been discovered in the British embassy, "I can assure you we'd all have been for the high jump." Martin Williams, secretary to Sir John Graham in Iran at the time, was the one who found the Americans, after searching for them in his own British car (the only Austin Maxi in Iran) and first sheltered them in his own house.Affleck is quoted as saying to The Sunday Telegraph: "I struggled with this long and hard, because it casts Britain and New Zealand in a way that is not totally fair. But I was setting up a situation where you needed to get a sense that these six people had nowhere else to go. It does not mean to diminish anyone."
On March 12, 2013, the New Zealand House of Representatives censured Affleck by unanimously agreeing to the following motion, initiated by New Zealand First leader Winston Peters:

... this House acknowledge[s] with gratitude the efforts of former New Zealand diplomats Chris Beeby and Richard Sewell in assisting American hostages in Tehran during the hostage crisis in 1979, and express[es] its regret that the director of the movie Argo saw fit to mislead the world about what actually happened during that crisis when, in reality, our courageous diplomats' inspirational actions were of significant help to the American hostages and deserve the factual and historical record to be corrected.


=== Imminent danger to the group ===
In the film, the diplomats face suspicious glances from Iranians whenever they go out in public, and appear close to being caught at many steps along the way to their freedom. In reality, the diplomats never appeared to be in imminent danger. Taylor's wife bought three sets of plane tickets from three different airlines ahead of time, without any issues.
The film depicts a dramatic last-minute cancellation of the mission by the Carter administration and Mendez declaring he will proceed with the mission. Carter delayed authorization by only 30 minutes, and that was before Mendez had left Europe for Iran.
The film portrays a tense situation when the crew tries to board the plane, and their identities are nearly discovered. No such confrontation with security officials took place at the departure gate.
The film has a dramatic chase sequence as the plane takes off; this did not occur. As Mark Lijek described it, "Fortunately for us, there were very few Revolutionary Guards in the area. It is why we turned up for a flight at 5.30 in the morning; even they weren't zealous enough to be there that early. The truth is the immigration officers barely looked at us and we were processed out in the regular way. We got on the flight to Zurich and then we were taken to the US ambassador's residence in Bern. It was that straightforward."


=== Other inaccuracies ===
The film contains other historical inaccuracies:

The screenplay does not include the six days Bob Anders, Mark and Cora Lijek and Joe and Kathy Stafford were on the run before taking refuge with the Canadians nor where Lee Schatz was until he joined the group at John and Zena Sheardown's home.
The screenplay has the escapees—Mark and Cora Lijek, Bob Anders, Lee Schatz, and Joe and Kathy Stafford—settling down to enforced cohabitation at the residence of the Canadian ambassador Ken Taylor. In reality, the group of five (Lee Schatz joined the Lijeks and Bob Anders about ten days later) was split between the Taylor house and the home of another Canadian official, John Sheardown and his wife Zena. It was in fact the friendship between Bob Anders and John Sheardown that led Bob to call John to seek sanctuary for the group when the haven with Thai cook Sam (Somchai) began to unravel. John's response to Bob was, "Why didn't you call sooner?"
"It's not true we could never go outside. John Sheardown's house had an interior courtyard with a garden and we could walk there freely," Mark Lijek says.
Lester Siegel, played by Alan Arkin, is not a real person. His name and some contribution are based on Robert Sidell's while his personality is based on Jack Warner's.
In the depiction of a frantic effort by CIA headquarters, in Langley, to get President Jimmy Carter to re-authorize the mission so that previously purchased airline tickets would still be valid, a CIA officer is portrayed as getting the White House telephone operator to connect him to Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan by impersonating a representative of the school attended by Jordan's children. In reality, Jordan was unmarried and had no children at the time.
The film depicts Mendez discovering the script with the title of Argo. In reality the script was titled Lord of Light, based on the book of the same name by Roger Zelazny. The CIA changed the title to Argo.
Comic book artist Jack Kirby did not do storyboard work for the fabricated CIA film production. Kirby created concept art for a proposed production of Lord of Light a few years before the Iranian hostage situation.
The Hollywood Sign is shown dilapidated as it had been in the 1970s. The sign had been repaired in 1978, two years before the events described in the film.
The Swissair flight that took Mendez and the hostage group out of Tehran is shown operated with a Boeing 747-300, a type which entered service in 1983, and is painted in a livery that Swissair introduced in 1980. In real life, the group departed Iran on a Swissair Douglas DC-8 named "Aargau".


== See also ==
Escape from Iran: The Canadian Caper, a 1981 television film about the "Canadian Caper".
On Wings of Eagles, a 1983 novel by Ken Follett, about Ross Perot's successful rescue of several of his employees from Iran just after the revolution.
Timeline of the Iranian hostage crisis


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Argo at IMDb 
Argo at Box Office Mojo
Argo at Rotten Tomatoes
Argo at Metacritic 
Radio interview with Ben Affleck regarding Argo, on NPR's Fresh Air (28 mins, 2013)12-3 incident
12 Years a Slave (film)
14 July Revolution
17 July Revolution
1908 bombardment of the Majlis
1917 (2019 film)
1921 Persian coup d'état
1947 Polish parliamentary election
1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine
1948 Arab–Israeli War
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
1948 Palestine war
1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
1949 Iranian Constituent Assembly election
1952 Egyptian Revolution
1953 Iranian coup d'état
1954 Geneva Conference
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
1954 Syrian coup d'état
1956 Poznań protests
1958 Lebanon crisis
1959 Mosul uprising
1959 Tibetan uprising
1960 Turkish coup d'état
1960 U-2 incident
1963 Syrian coup d'état
1963 demonstrations in Iran
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
1966 Syrian coup d'état
1967 Hong Kong riots
1968 Peruvian coup d'état
1968 Polish political crisis
1969 Libyan revolution
1969 Sudanese coup d'état
1970 Polish protests
1971 JVP insurrection
1971 Sudanese coup d'état
1971 Turkish military memorandum
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency
1973 Afghan coup d'état
1973 Chilean coup d'état
1973 Uruguayan coup d'état
1973 oil crisis
1976 Argentine coup d'état
1978 Qom protest
1978 Somali coup attempt
1978 Tabriz protests
1979 Herat uprising
1979 International Women's Day protests in Tehran
1979 Khuzestan insurgency
1980 Summer Olympics boycott
1980 Turkish coup d'état
1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War
1982 kidnapping of Iranian diplomats
1984 Summer Olympics boycott
1986 Black Sea incident
1987 Lieyu massacre
1987 Mecca incident
1987–1989 JVP insurrection
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
1988 Polish strikes
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt
1992 Buenos Aires Israeli embassy bombing
1999 arrest of Iranian Jews
19th Screen Actors Guild Awards
2000 Hezbollah cross-border raid
2000–2006 Shebaa Farms conflict
2003 Iranian student protests
2005 Ahvaz unrest
2005 Hezbollah cross-border raid
2006 Lebanon War
2008 Israel–Hezbollah prisoner exchange
2009 Hezbollah plot in Egypt
2009 Iranian presidential election
2009 Iranian presidential election protests
2009 Sudan airstrikes
2011 Khuzestan protests
2011 alleged Iran assassination plot
2011–2012 Iranian protests
2012 Bangkok bombings
2012 Burgas bus bombing
2012 Cyprus terrorist plot
2012 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards
2012 Toronto International Film Festival
2012 attacks on Israeli diplomats
2014 Gaza War
2016 Cyrus the Great Revolt
2017–2018 Iranian protests
2018 Dervish protests
2018 Iranian protest movement
2018 Iranian university protests
2018 Iranian water protests
2018 protests in Iran
2018–2019 Iranian general strikes and protests
2019 Beirut drone crash
2019 Israeli airstrikes in Iraq
2019 Sistan and Baluchestan protests
2019–2020 Iranian protests
2020 Iran explosions
2021 Iranian water protests
2021 Natanz incident
2021 Sistan and Baluchestan protests
2021–2022 Iranian protests
2022 Erbil missile attacks
2022 Iranian food protests
2022 Istanbul terror plot
2023 Damascus airstrike
2023 Iran drone attacks
2023 Israel–Hamas war
2023 Israel–Lebanon border clashes
2023 Israel–Lebanon shellings
20 June 1981 Iranian protests
66th British Academy Film Awards
85th Academy Awards
8888 Uprising
AMAD Project
AMIA bombing
ANZUS
ASEAN
ASEAN Declaration
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A History of Violence
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Separation
A Special Day
A Star Is Born (2018 film)
Abbasid Caliphate
Abbie Cornish
Abd al-Aziz Bin Baz
Abdullah Yusuf Azzam
Abigail Breslin
Abkhaz–Georgian conflict
Able Archer 83
Abolhassan Banisadr
Abraham Accords
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi
Abu Sayyaf
Abul A'la Maududi
Abul Hasan Ali Hasani Nadwi
Academy Award
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay)
Achaemenid Empire
Achaemenid architecture
Active measures
Adaptation (film)
Aden Emergency
Adrian Cioroianu
Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)
Afsharid Iran
Agriculture in Iran
Ahl-i Hadith
Ahmad Reza Djalali
Ahmed Yassin
Ahna O'Reilly
Air (2023 film)
Akhtar Mansour
Akkadian Empire
Al-Islah (Yemen)
Al-Nour Party
Al-Qaeda
Al-Qaeda in Iraq
Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb
Al-Shabaab (militant group)
Al-Wadiah War
Al-Wathbah uprising
Al Asalah
Al Wefaq
Alan Arkin
Alan Bates
Albanian–Chinese split
Albanian–Soviet split
Albert Finney
Alcora Exercise
Aldis Hodge
Alessandro Nivola
Alex Sharp
Alex von Tunzelmann
Alexandre Desplat
Algerian Civil War
Algerian War
Ali Khamenei
Ali Shariati
Ali al-Tamimi
Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore
Alid dynasties of northern Iran
Alija Izetbegović
All About Eve
All About My Mother
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men
Allied Control Council
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Allison Janney
Almost Famous
Amadeus (film)
Ambassador
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Broadcasting Company
American Hustle
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
Amerika (magazine)
Amy Adams
Amy Irving
Amy Ryan
Amélie
An American in Paris (film)
Andrea Riseborough
Andrew Thorpe
André Fontaine
Andy Serkis
Angela Bassett
Anglo-Persian Oil Company
Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran
Angolan Civil War
Angolan War of Independence
Anil Kapoor
Anne Thompson (film critic)
Anne of the Thousand Days
Anneli Ute Gabanyi
Annette Bening
Annexation of Goa
Annexation of Hyderabad
Annie Hall
Another Round (film)
Ansar Allah
Anthony Andrews
Anti-Iranian sentiment
Anti-Zionism
Anti-imperialism
Antony Sher
Anushtegin dynasty
Anwar al-Awlaki
Apartheid
Apollo 13 (film)
April 2015 Qalamoun incident
Aq Qoyunlu
Arab Cold War
Arab Spring
Arab Winter
Arab separatism in Khuzestan
Arab–Israeli alliance against Iran
Archie Brown (historian)
Architects of Iran
Ardeshir Hosseinpour
Are You There God? It's Me, Margaret. (film)
Argentine Revolution
Argo (film score)
Armenian language
Arms race
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.
Aryan
Asaluyeh
Ashura protests
Ashutosh Lobo Gajiwala
Asian Relations Conference
Assassination and terrorism in Iran
Assassination of Iranian nuclear scientists
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
Assembly of Experts
Associated Press
Assyrian Neo-Aramaic
Assyrians in Iran
Ata Abu Rashta
Athan Theoharis
Atonement (2007 film)
Atropatene
August 2018 uprising in Iran
August Diehl
Austin Maxi
Authenticity Party
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Automotive industry in Iran
Avatar (2009 film)
Axis of Resistance
Ayman al-Zawahiri
Ayush Mahesh Khedekar
Azerbaijan (Iran)
Azerbaijani language
Azerbaijanis
Azharuddin Mohammed Ismail
BAFTA Award for Best Direction
BAFTA Award for Best Editing
BAFTA Award for Best Film
Ba'athist Iraq
Babel (film)
Bagdad Cafe
Baháʼí Faith in Iran
Ballad of a Soldier
Bamboo Curtain
Bandung Conference
Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami
Bangladesh Liberation War
Banking and insurance in Iran
Baruch Plan
Battle for the Planet of the Apes
Bay of Pigs Invasion
Becket (1964 film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Ben Affleck
Ben Affleck filmography
Benicio del Toro
Benjamin Bratt
Bennifer
Berlin Blockade
Berlin Crisis of 1961
Berlin Wall
Bernard Hill
Bicycle Thieves
Bid Kaneh explosion
Bill Clinton
Bill Paxton
Billy Boyd (actor)
Billy Crudup
Birdman (film)
Black Friday (1978)
Black Panther (film)
Black September
Blogging in Iran
Blu-ray Disc
Bob Balaban
Bob Gunton
Bob Mondello
Boeing 747
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Boko Haram
Bonyad
Borders of Iran
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Bougainville conflict
Bowling for Columbine
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Brad Pitt
Bradley Cooper
Brassed Off
Braveheart
Breaking the Waves
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Brendan Fraser
Brezhnev Doctrine
Brian d'Arcy James
Bricker Amendment
Brinkmanship
British Board of Film Classification
Brokeback Mountain
Bruce Jones (actor)
Bruce Wayne (DC Extended Universe)
Bryan Cranston
Bryce Dallas Howard
Bugsy
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
Buyid dynasty
CBS
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
CODA (2021 film)
COVID-19 pandemic in Iran
Cabaret (1972 film)
Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam
Caleb Landry Jones
Cambodian Civil War
Cambodian genocide
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Canada
Canadian Caper
Canadian passport
Cancer
Caper film
Capitalism
Capture of the Tuapse
Carnation Revolution
Carter Doctrine
Casablanca (film)
Casamance conflict
Caspian Hyrcanian mixed forests
Cate Blanchett
Catherine Zeta-Jones
Caucasus
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Censorship in Iran
Central American crisis
Central Bank of Iran
Central Intelligence Agency
Central Treaty Organization
Chabahar Free Trade-Industrial Zone
Chadian–Libyan War
Chadwick Boseman
Chargé d'affaires
Chariots of Fire
Charles Dance
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (film)
Chauvinism
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Sun-Times
Chicago school of economics
Chief of staff
Childrens' Rights in Iran
Chinatown (1974 film)
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Cho Yeo-jeong
Chobanids
Choi Woo-shik
Chris Beeby
Chris Cooper
Chris Lowell
Chris Messina
Chris Terrio
Christian Bale
Christianity in Iran
Christine Baranski
Christoph Waltz
Christopher Denham
Christy Lemire
Cicely Tyson
Cimarron (1931 film)
CinemaScore
Cinema of Iran
Circassians in Iran
Clarke Peters
Clea DuVall
Clifton Collins Jr.
Climate change in Iran
Clive Owen
Cold War
Colin Firth
Colm Feore
Colombian conflict
Columbia Pictures
Comecon
Communications in Iran
Communism
Communist insurgency in Malaysia (1968–1989)
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Communist insurgency in Thailand
Concept art
Congo Crisis
Congressional Gold Medal
Conservatism
Conservatism in the United States
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
Constitution of Iran
Construction industry of Iran
Consultant
Containment
Contemporary Islamic philosophy
Contras
Corfu Channel incident
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Corruption in Iran
Costa-Gavras
Crash (2004 film)
Crime in Iran
Criticism of Islamism
Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Picture
Crusade for Freedom
Cuban Missile Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Cultural Revolution
Culture of Iran
Cursed soldiers
Cyberwarfare and Iran
Cypriot intercommunal violence
Cyprus Emergency
Cyrus Vance
César Award for Best Foreign Film
D. W. Moffett
DVD
Dan Futterman
Danai Gurira
Dance the Night Away (Van Halen song)
Dances with Wolves
Dangerous Liaisons
Daniel Brühl
Daniel Durant
Daniel Kaluuya
David Denby
David Klawans
David S. Painter
David Wenham
Day for Night (film)
Dead Poets Society
Deadline Hollywood
December 1979 Iranian constitutional referendum
December 2014 Rif Dimashq airstrikes
Defense Industries Organization
Defense industry of Iran
Deidre Goodwin
Dekemvriana
Democratic capitalism
Demographics of Iran
Denis Ménochet
Denise Faye
Dennis Quaid
Denver Post
Deobandi
Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency
Derek Jacobi
Dev Patel
Dhofar War
Diane Kruger
Dianne Wiest
Diplomatic Reception Room (White House)
Dire Straits
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency
Dirty Pretty Things (film)
Dirty War
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Division of Korea
Django Unchained
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dominic Monaghan
Dominic West
Dominican Civil War
Domino theory
Don Cheadle
Douglas DC-8
Dr. Strangelove
Driving Miss Daisy
Dunkirk (2017 film)
Détente
E! Online
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
East German uprising of 1953
East of Eden (film)
Eastern Bloc
Eastern Congo Initiative
Economic Cooperation Organization
Economic history of Iran
Economic sector
Economy of Iran
Economy of the Middle East
Ed Harris
Eddie Redmayne
Educating Rita (film)
Education in Iran
Edward Norton
Egyptian Islamic Jihad
Egyptian–Libyan War
Eileen Atkins
Eisenhower Doctrine
Ekaterina Shchelkanova
El Porteñazo
Elam
Eldiguzids
Elections in Iran
Eli Roth
Elijah Wood
Elisabeth Röhm
Ellen Schrecker
Embassy of the United States, Tehran
Emilia Jones
Emily Watson
Emily Woof
Emma Stone
Energy in Iran
Ennahda
Entertainment Weekly
Environmental issues in Iran
Erika Christensen
Eritrean Civil Wars
Eritrean War of Independence
Escape from Iran: The Canadian Caper
Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind
Ethiopian Civil War
Ethnic minorities in Iran
Ethnic nationalism
Eugenio Derbez
Eurocommunism
European Economic Community
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Execution of Imam Khomeini's Order
Expediency Discernment Council
Expulsion of Soviets from Albania
Extraction (military)
Ey Iran
Faith campaign
Falklands War
Fall of communism in Albania
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the inner German border
Fandango Media
Fandom, Inc.
Fanny and Alexander
Far from Heaven
Fargo (1996 film)
Fascism
Fashion in Iran
Fatah Alliance
Fatah al-Islam
February 2018 Israel–Syria incident
February 2019 Warsaw Conference
Ferdia Walsh-Peelo
Fereydoon Abbasi
Film producer
Filmmaking
First Cow
First Indochina War
First Iraqi–Kurdish War
First Lady of the United States
First Nagorno-Karabakh War
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Fitilieh programme protests in Iran
Florida Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
Football in Iran
Forbidden Games
Foreign direct investment in Iran
Foreign relations of Iran
Forest Whitaker
Forrest Gump
Forty Hadith of Ruhullah Khomeini
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Four Weddings and a Funeral
Frances McDormand
Francop Affair
Frank Langella
Frataraka
Fred Halliday
Freedom and Justice Party (Egypt)
Freedom of religion in Iran
Freida Pinto
Fresh Air
From Here to Eternity
Frozen conflict
Fruit production in Iran
GK Films
Gabriel Gorodetsky
Gabriel Kolko
Gandhi (film)
Gar Alperovitz
Garret Dillahunt
Gary Sinise
Gaza War (2008–2009)
Gaza–Israel conflict
Gdańsk Agreement
Geir Lundestad
Gene Hackman
Geneva Summit (1955)
Geneva Summit (1985)
Gentleman's Agreement
Geoffrey Rush
Geography of Iran
George Clooney
Georgian language
Georgian–Ossetian conflict
Gera Demands
Geraldine Somerville
German Autumn
German reunification
Gervaise (film)
Get Out
Ghaznavids
Ghost World (film)
Ghurid dynasty
Gigi (1958 film)
Giles Scott-Smith
Gladiator (2000 film)
Glasnost
Glen Powell
Gods and Monsters (film)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Gone Baby Gone
Gone with the Wind (film)
Good Will Hunting
Goodfellas
Gosford Park
Goulash Communism
Gouzenko Affair
Government of Canada
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Gran Torino
Grand Bazaar, Tehran
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Grand Mosque seizure
Grant Heslov
Gravity (2013 film)
Greater Iran
Greek Civil War
Greek junta
Green Algeria Alliance
Green Book (film)
Greg Kinnear
Guardian Council
Guardianship of the Islamic Jurist
Guatemalan Civil War
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Guevarism
Guided democracy
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Gulf War
Gulf of Sidra incident (1981)
Guy Pearce
Gwyneth Paltrow
Hadas
Haji Shariatullah
Hallstein Doctrine
Hamas
Hamilton Jordan
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hank Azaria
Harry Shum Jr.
Harvey Klehr
Hassan Al-Turabi
Hassan al-Banna
Healthcare in Iran
Hebrew language
Helen Mirren
Helena Bonham Carter
Hell or High Water (film)
Her (film)
Herbert Feis
Hezbollah
Hezbollah involvement in the Syrian civil war
Hezbollah–Israel conflict
Hibatullah Akhundzada
Hidden Figures
High Heels (1991 film)
Higher education in Iran
Historical drama
History of Iran
History of Solidarity
History of democracy in classical Iran
History of electricity in Iran
History of the Islamic Republic of Iran
History of the Jews in Iran
History of the judicial system of Iran
Hizb ut-Tahrir
Hizb ut-Tahrir Britain
Hizb ut-Tahrir in Central Asia
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Hochi Film Award
Hollywood, Los Angeles
Hollywood Sign
Houston Film Critics Society Award for Best Picture
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Howards End (film)
Hoxhaism
Hugo Speer
Hugo Weaving
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Human capital flight from Iran
Human rights in Iran
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
I, Daniel Blake
IDRO Group
IMDb (identifier)
IRISL Group
I Killed My Lesbian Wife, Hung Her on a Meat Hook, and Now I Have a Three-Picture Deal at Disney
Ian Holm
Ian McKellen
Ifni War
Ilkhanate
Illiberal democracy
Imelda Staunton
Imperial Anthem of Iran
Imperialism
In Bruges
In the Heat of the Night (film)
In the Mood for Love
Indiewire
Indo-Pakistani War of 1947–1948
Indo-Persian culture
Indonesian National Revolution
Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66
Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation
Industry of Iran
Inglourious Basterds
Insurgency in Balochistan
Intellectual movements in Iran
Intellectual property in Iran
Intelligence Star
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
Interim Government of Iran
Interim Government of Iran (1979)
Interim Government of Iran (1981)
Internal conflict in Peru
International military intervention against the Islamic State
International propagation of Salafism and Wahhabism
International rankings of Iran
Iran
Iran Air Flight 655
Iran Aviation Industries Organization
Iran Electronics Industries
Iran and state-sponsored terrorism
Iran and the World Trade Organization
Iran crisis of 1946
Iran hostage crisis
Iran student protests, July 1999
Iranian Armenians
Iranian Azerbaijanis
Iranian Economic Reform Plan
Iranian Embassy siege
Iranian Georgians
Iranian Green Movement
Iranian Kurdistan
Iranian National Jewels
Iranian Reformists
Iranian Revolution
Iranian Space Agency
Iranian Students News Agency
Iranian Turkmens
Iranian architecture
Iranian calendars
Iranian cuisine
Iranian diaspora
Iranian folk music
Iranian folklore
Iranian hip hop
Iranian jazz
Iranian languages
Iranian modern and contemporary art
Iranian nationality law
Iranian oil bourse
Iranian peoples
Iranian philosophy
Iranian plateau
Iranian pop music
Iranian protests against compulsory hijab
Iranian rial
Iranian rock
Iranian studies
Iranian support for Hamas
Iran–Iraq War
Iran–Israel conflict during the Syrian civil war
Iran–Israel proxy conflict
Iran–Israel relations
Iran–PJAK conflict
Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict
Iraqi Intifada (1952)
Iraqi–Kurdish conflict
Irish Film and Television Award for Best International Film
Iron Curtain
Irrfan Khan
Islam and democracy
Islam and modernity
Islam and violence
Islam in Iran
Islamic Action Front
Islamic Consultative Assembly
Islamic Declaration
Islamic Defenders Front
Islamic Government
Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force
Islamic Republic of Iran Armed Forces
Islamic Republic of Iran Army
Islamic Republic of Iran Navy
Islamic Republic of Iran Railways
Islamic Salvation Front
Islamic State
Islamic emirate
Islamic extremism
Islamic fundamentalism
Islamic fundamentalism in Iran
Islamic modernism
Islamic monarchy
Islamic religious police
Islamic republic
Islamic revival
Islamic socialism
Islamic state
Islamic terrorism
Islamism
Islamism and Islamic terrorism in the Balkans
Islamism in Sudan
Islamism in the Gaza Strip
Islamism in the United Kingdom
Islamist Bloc
Islamistan
Islamization
Islamization in Pakistan
Islamization of Iran
Islamization of knowledge
Israel and state-sponsored terrorism
Israel in the Iran–Iraq War
Israeli–Lebanese conflict
Israeli–Palestinian conflict
Israeli–Syrian ceasefire line incidents during the Syrian civil war
Istanbul
It Happened One Night
Izvestia
Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Jack Huston
Jack Kirby
Jack L. Warner
Jack Ryan (character)
Jacky Ido
Jacob Vargas
Jalayirid Sultanate
Jamaat-e-Islami
Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan
Jamaican political conflict
Jamal al-Din al-Afghani
James Brolin
James Hong
James Wilby
Jamiat-e Islami
Jamie Lee Curtis
Janelle Monáe
Jang Hye-jin (actress)
January 2013 Rif Dimashq airstrike
January 2015 Mazraat Amal incident
January 2015 Shebaa Farms incident
Javier Bardem
Jean de Florette
Jebel Akhdar War
Jennifer Ehle
Jennifer Esposito
Jennifer Lawrence
Jenny Slate
Jeremy Northam
Jeremy Renner
Jeremy Strong
Jessica Chastain
Jian Ghomeshi
Jihad
Jihadism
Jim Carter (actor)
Jim Parsons
Jimmy Carter
Jiroft culture
Joe Morgenstern
Joe Williams (film critic)
John C. Reilly
John Carroll Lynch
John Chambers (make-up artist)
John Costello (historian)
John Earl Haynes
John Goodman
John Hawkes (actor)
John Lewis Gaddis
John Noble
John Rhys-Davies
John Sheardown
John Slattery
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Johnson Doctrine
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
Jonathan Reed Winkler
Joseph Fiennes
Joseph Gordon-Levitt
Josh Brolin
Joshuah Bearman
Juan Cole
Juche
Judi Dench
Juhayman al-Otaybi
Julia (1977 film)
Julie Dreyfus
July 2022 Damascus airstrikes
June 1976 protests
Jung Hyeon-jun
Jung Ji-so
Jussi Hanhimäki
Justice and Construction Party
Justice and Development Party (Morocco)
KDPI insurgency (1989–1996)
KGB
Kagemusha
Karine A affair
Karl Urban
Kart dynasty
Kashmir Princess
Kassites
Kathleen Quinlan
Ke Huy Quan
Keith Szarabajka
Kelly Macdonald
Kelvin Harrison Jr.
Ken Follett
Ken Young
Kennedy Doctrine
Kenneth D. Taylor
Kenneth Turan
Kerry Bishé
Kevin Bacon
Kevin Costner
Kevin Spacey
Keynesian economics
Khanates of the Caucasus
Khomeinism
King Kong (2005 film)
Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity)
Kingdom of Cappadocia
Kingdom of Pontus
Kings of Persis
Kinmen Agreement
Kirsten Dunst
Kish Island
Kitchen Debate
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Korean DMZ Conflict
Korean War
Koza riot
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kristin Scott Thomas
Kura–Araxes culture
Kurdish languages
Kurdish separatism in Iran
Kurds in Iran
Kyle Chandler
Kyle Smith (critic)
L.A. Confidential (film)
LGBT rights in Iran
La La Land
La Ronde (1950 film)
Lacombe, Lucien
Lady Bird (film)
Lake Urmia
Land and Freedom (film)
Languages of Iran
Laotian Civil War
Larenz Tate
Lashkar-e-Taiba
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leave No Trace (film)
Lebanese Civil War
Led Zeppelin
Lee Jung-eun (actress)
Lee Sun-kyun
Lesley Sharp
Letitia Wright
Letters from Iwo Jima
Liberal democracy
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Licorice Pizza
Liev Schreiber
Life Is Beautiful
Lisa Schwarzbaum
List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States
List of Iranian news agencies
List of Iranian officials
List of Iranian research centers
List of Iranians
List of Islamic political parties
List of Soviet Union–United States summits
List of accolades received by Argo (2012 film)
List of airlines of Iran
List of ancient Persians
List of awards and nominations received by Ben Affleck
List of cities in Iran by province
List of companies of Iran
List of conflicts related to the Cold War
List of current Iran governors-general
List of current ambassadors from Iran
List of diplomats of the United Kingdom to Iran
List of earthquakes in Iran
List of economic laws in Iran
List of heads of state of Iran
List of islands of Iran
List of largest cities of Iran
List of military equipment manufactured in Iran
List of monarchs of Persia
List of mountains in Iran
List of national symbols of Iran
List of newspapers in Iran
List of political parties in Iran
List of pre-modern Iranian scientists and scholars
List of projectile attacks from Lebanon on Israel and the Golan Heights
List of twin towns and sister cities in Iran
List of universities in Iran
List of years in Iran
Little Miss Sunshine
Little Satan
Little T&A
Liv Tyler
LivePlanet
Live by Night (film)
Lloyd Gardner
Local councils of Iran
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
Lord of Light
Los Angeles
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Screenplay
Los Angeles Times
Lost in Translation (film)
Lou Lumenick
Louis C.K.
Love Story (1970 film)
Loveless (film)
Lucas Hedges
Lucy Liu
Ludacris
Luis Guzmán
Lullubi
Lupita Nyong'o
MI5
MI6
Maclean's
Mad Max: Fury Road
Madhur Mittal
Madiun Affair
Madkhalism
Maggie Smith
Magnolia (film)
Mahabad riots
Mahershala Ali
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Israel
Mahsa Amini protests
Mahshahr massacre
Majid Shahriari
Make-up artist
Malayan Emergency
Malaysian Islamic Party
Malcolm X
Manhattan (1979 film)
Mannaeans
Maoism
March 1949 Syrian coup d'état
March 1979 Iranian Islamic Republic referendum
March 2017 Israel–Syria incident
Marius Oprea
Mark Addy
Mark Ruffalo
Mark Rylance
Marlee Matlin
Marshall Plan
Martial law in Poland
Martin Clunes
Martin Freeman
Martin Williams (diplomat)
Martin Wuttke
Marty (film)
Marxism–Leninism
Mary Elise Sarotte
Mary Steenburgen
Masoud Alimohammadi
Masoumeh Ebtekar
Mass media in Iran
Matt Dillon
Mau Mau rebellion
May 1947 crises
May 2013 Rif Dimashq airstrikes
May 2023 Gaza–Israel clashes
May 68
McCarthyism
McLean, Virginia
Medes
Melvyn P. Leffler
Memento (film)
Mena Suvari
Metacritic
Metapolitefsi
Mexican Dirty War
Michael B. Jordan
Michael Beschloss
Michael Cox (academic)
Michael Douglas
Michael Fassbender
Michael Gambon
Michael Keaton
Michael Peña
Michelle Obama
Michelle Yeoh
Mick LaSalle
Midnight Cowboy
Midnight Express (film)
Miguel Ferrer
Mike Myers
Mike Vogel
Milad Tower
Milestones (book)
Military history of Iran
Million Dollar Baby
Millî Görüş
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Mining in Iran
Ministry of Intelligence (Iran)
Ministry of Internal Affairs (Soviet Union)
Miranda Otto
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi
Mohsen Fakhrizadeh
Mommy (2014 film)
Monetarism
Mongolian Revolution of 1990
Moonlight (2016 film)
Morgenthau Plan
Mostafa Ahmadi Roshan
Moulin Rouge!
Mozambican Civil War
Mozambican War of Independence
Mrs. Miniver
Muammar Gaddafi
Muhammad Abduh
Muhammad Al-Munajjid
Muhammad Asad
Muhammad Iqbal
Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani
Muhammad Rizieq Shihab
Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab
Muhammad ibn al-Uthaymeen
Mulholland Drive (film)
Mullah Omar
Munich massacre
Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i
Music of Iran
Muslim Brotherhood
Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt
Muslim Brotherhood in Syria
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
Muzaffarids (Iran)
My Fair Lady (film)
Mya (singer)
Mystic River (film)
Mélanie Laurent
NATO
NBC
NBCUniversal
NDF Rebellion
NPR
Naomi Watts
Nathan Lane
National Congress Party (Sudan)
National Development Fund of Iran
National Iranian Oil Company
National Iraqi Alliance
Nationalism
Navvab Safavi
Ndogboyosoi War
Necmettin Erbakan
Neo-Assyrian Empire
Neo-Babylonian Empire
Neo-Nazism
Neoclassical economics
Neues Deutschland
Neutral and Non-Aligned European States
New Jewel Movement
New People's Army rebellion
New York Daily News
New York Post
New Zealand
New Zealand First
New Zealand House of Representatives
Nicaraguan Revolution
Nicholas J. Cull
Nicholas Thompson (editor)
Nigerian Civil War
Nightcrawler (film)
Nixon Doctrine
No Country for Old Men
Nojeh coup plot
Nomadland
Non-Aligned Movement
Norman Davies
North Borneo dispute
North Yemen Civil War
Northeast Asia Treaty Organization
Nowruz
Nuclear arms race
Nuclear program of Iran
Occupation of the Baltic states
Octavia Spencer
Odd Arne Westad
Ogaden War
Oliver! (film)
Omar Abdel-Rahman
Omar Bongo
Omid Abtahi
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On Wings of Eagles
On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences
On the Waterfront
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Picture
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Operation Condor
Operation Downfall
Operation Eagle Claw
Operation Full Disclosure
Operation Gladio
Operation House of Cards
Operation INFEKTION
Operation Jungle
Operation Northern Shield
Operation Outside the Box
Operation Priboi
Operation RYAN
Operation Unthinkable
Operation Valuable
Opium in Iran
Oppenheimer (film)
Opposition to military action against Iran
Ordinary People
Orlando Bloom
Oromo conflict
Osama bin Laden
Ostpolitik
Out of Africa (film)
Owen Gleiberman
Pact of Madrid
Pahlavi dynasty
Paix et Liberté
Pan-Islamism
Papua conflict
Parasite (2019 film)
Park Myung-hoon
Park So-dam
Parthian Empire
Partition of India
Patrick J. Hearden
Patrick Vaughan
Patton (film)
Paul Barber (actor)
Paul Dano
Paul Giamatti
Paul Herman
Peaceful Revolution
Peaceful coexistence
Pearl Street Films
People's Mujahedin of Iran
People Party
People Power Revolution
Peoples of the Caucasus
Percentages agreement
Perestroika
Persecution of Baháʼís
Persecution of Zoroastrians
Persian Constitutional Revolution
Persian art
Persian astronomy
Persian gardens
Persian language
Persian literature
Persian mythology
Persian name
Persian traditional music
Persian wine
Persianate society
Persianization
Persians
Peter Bradshaw
Peter Dinklage
Peter Gallagher
Peter Riegert
Peter Travers
Petro-Islam
Petroleum industry in Iran
Petrov Affair
Pharmaceuticals in Iran
Philip Baker Hall
Philomena (film)
Ping-pong diplomacy
Platoon (film)
Polish October
Polish Round Table Agreement
Political Islam
Political aspects of Islam
Political status of Kosovo
Political status of Nagorno-Karabakh
Political status of Taiwan
Political violence in the United States during the Cold War
Politics of Fidel Castro
Politics of Iran
Popular Arab and Islamic Congress
Portrait of a Lady on Fire
Portuguese Colonial War
Post-Islamism
Potsdam Conference
Prague Spring
Pravda
Prehistory of Iran
President of Iran
Prisoner X2
Privatization in Iran
Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture
Production logo
Promising Young Woman
Propaganda in Iran
Prosperous Justice Party
Protests of 1968
Proto-Elamite
Provinces of Iran
Public holidays in Iran
Qajar Iran
Qara Qoyunlu
Qazi Hussain Ahmad
Quds Day
Queen Latifah
Quentin Tarantino
Qutbism
Rabee al-Madkhali
Rached Ghannouchi
Rachel McAdams
Racism
Radio Free Asia
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Rain Man
Ramadan Revolution
Rashid Rida
Rashidun Caliphate
Reagan Doctrine
Reaganomics
Realpolitik
Rebecca (1940 film)
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
Red Scare
Religion in Iran
Renée Zellweger
Restatement of Policy on Germany
Review aggregator
Revolutionaries
Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces of Peru
Revolutions of 1989
Reykjavík Summit
Rhodesian Bush War
Richard Dillane
Richard E. Grant
Richard Gere
Richard III (1955 film)
Richard Kind
Richard Roeper
Right of asylum
Robert Carlyle
Robert D. English
Robert Hugh Ferrell
Robin Williams
Rocky
Rod Taylor
Rodrigo Prieto
Roger Ebert
Roger Zelazny
Rollback
Rolling Stone
Roma (2018 film)
Romanian revolution
Ronald E. Powaski
Ronald Reagan
Room at the Top (1959 film)
Rory Cochrane
Ross Perot
Rotten Tomatoes
Rubina Ali
Rudolph Winnacker
Rudé právo
Ruhollah Khomeini
Russia and the Iran–Israel proxy conflict
Russian Life
Russian Revolution
Russian espionage in the United States
Russia–Hamas relations
Russia–NATO relations
Ryan Phillippe
Sacha Baron Cohen
Safar al-Hawali
Safari Club
Safavid Iran
Saffarid dynasty
Safwat Hegazi
Sahwa movement
Salafi jihadism
Salafi movement
Salman al-Ouda
Salvadoran Civil War
Sam Rockwell
Samanid Empire
Samara Weaving
San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Film
San Francisco Chronicle
Sand War
Sandra Bullock
Sandra Oh
Sasanian Empire
Saul Bass
Saur Revolution
Saving Private Ryan
Sayyid Qutb
Scent of a Woman (1974 film)
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Science and technology in Iran
Science fiction film
Scoot McNairy
Scouting in Iran
Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture
Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role
Scythians
Sean Astin
Sean Bean
Second Cold War
Second Iraqi–Kurdish War
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Seleucid Empire
Seljuk Empire
Sense and Sensibility (film)
September 11 attacks
Seth MacFarlane
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Shakespeare in Love
Sharia
Shatt al-Arab dispute
Shea Whigham
Sheila Vand
Shen Zhihua
Shetab Banking System
Shifta War
Shoplifters (film)
Shura
Sideways
Silver Linings Playbook
Simba rebellion
Simon Callow
Sino-Indian War
Sino-Indian border dispute
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Sino-Soviet split
Sino-Vietnamese War
Sir John Graham, 4th Baronet
Sissy Spacek
Sistan and Baluchestan province
Six-Day War
Slavery in 21st-century jihadism
Slumdog Millionaire
Smokehouse Pictures
Social democracy
Socialism
Solidarity (Polish trade union)
Somali Rebellion
Song Kang-ho
Sophie Thompson
South African Border War
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
South Lebanon conflict (1985–2000)
South Yemen
South Yemen Civil War
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization
Soviet Union
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet involvement in regime change
Soviet reaction to the Polish crisis of 1980–1981
Soviet–Afghan War
Space Race
Spanish transition to democracy
Spartacus (film)
Sport in Iran
Spotlight (film)
Sputnik crisis
St. Louis Gateway Film Critics Association Award for Best Picture
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
Stalinism
Stanley Fish
Stanley Tucci
Stansfield Turner
Star Wars (film)
Stasi
State-owned enterprise
State of Law Coalition
Stephanie Hsu
Stephen Fry
Stephen Holden
Sterling K. Brown
Steve Carell
Steve Huison
Steven Bauer
Steven Spielberg
Stolen Summer
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Strategic Defense Initiative
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union
Studies in Intelligence
Stuxnet
Suez Crisis
Sufi–Salafi relations
Sultans of Swing
Sunday Bloody Sunday (film)
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Supply-side economics
Supreme Audit Court of Iran
Supreme Leader of Iran
Supreme National Security Council
Susan Misner
Swissair
Sylvester Groth
Syria missile strikes (August 2019)
Syria missile strikes (January 2021)
Syria missile strikes (November 2019)
Syria missile strikes (September 2018)
Syrian Crisis of 1957
Syrian civil war
TASS
Tahirid dynasty
Taliban
Talibanization
Tanay Chheda
Tanvi Ganesh Lonkar
Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani
Taraji P. Henson
Tariq Ramadan
Tate Donovan
Taxation in Iran
Taye Diggs
Tehran
Tehran (TV series)
Tehran Metro
Tehran Stock Exchange
Tehrangeles
Telecommunication Company of Iran
Telluride Film Festival
Terms of Endearment
Terrence Howard
Tess Harper
Thandiwe Newton
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Banshees of Inisherin
The Battle of Algiers
The Beasts (2022 film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Big Short (film)
The Birdcage
The Boston Globe
The Boy and the Heron
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Broken Circle Breakdown
The Cardinal
The Commitments (film)
The Crying Game
The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (film)
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Departed
The Descendants
The Elephant Man (film)
The English Patient (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The Father (2020 film)
The Favourite
The French Connection (film)
The Full Monty
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Graduate
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Green Book (Muammar Gaddafi)
The Guardian
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Help (film)
The Hours (film)
The Hurt Locker
The Hustler
The Instigators
The Irishman
The Killing Fields (film)
The Killing of a Chinese Bookie
The King's Speech
The Last Duel (2021 film)
The Last Emperor
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Lives of Others
The Lobster
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Name of the Rose (film)
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Newspaper
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Piano
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Principles of State and Government in Islam
The Purple Rose of Cairo
The Queen (2006 film)
The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Robe (film)
The Rolling Stones
The Shape of Water
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Social Network
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sound Barrier
The Sound of Music (film)
The Sting
The Sunday Telegraph
The Town (2010 film)
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Tree of Life (film)
The Tree of Wooden Clogs
The Trial of the Chicago 7
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Wages of Fear
The Wall Street Journal
The Washington Post
The Washington Times
Third-Worldism
Third Indochina War
Thomas A. Bailey
Thomas Haden Church
Thomas J. McCormick
Thora Birch
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Thriller film
Til Schweiger
Time (magazine)
Timeline of events in the Cold War
Timeline of the Iranian hostage crisis
Times Mirror Square
Timothy Garton Ash
Timothy Naftali
Timothy Snyder
Timothy Spall
Timurid Empire
Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy (film)
Titanic (1997 film)
Titoism
Tito–Stalin split
Titus Welliver
Tlatelolco massacre
Tobacco Protest
Tom Hanks
Tom Hollander
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tom Wilkinson
Tomas Milian
Tommy Lee Jones
Toni Collette
Tony Judt
Tony Mendez
Topher Grace
Toronto Star
Totalitarianism
Toto the Hero
Tourism in Iran
Toyota War
Traffic (2000 film)
Transition to the New Order
Transnistria War
Transport in Iran
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Triumph of Tehran
Trotskyism
Troy Kotsur
Truman Doctrine
Trybuna Ludu
Turco-Persian tradition
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Turkish model
Turkish straits crisis
Tvrtko Jakovina
Two-nation theory
Ty Burr
USA Today
USS Pueblo (AGER-2)
Ugandan Bush War
Uganda–Tanzania War
Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 protests
Ulbricht Doctrine
Ultranationalism
Umayyad Caliphate
Ummah
Unforgiven
United 93 (film)
United Kingdom
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1747
United States Department of State
United States Secretary of State
United States invasion of Grenada
United States invasion of Panama
United States involvement in regime change
United States withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
University of Chicago Persian antiquities dispute
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Urartu
Van Halen
Variety (magazine)
Velvet Revolution
Venture capital in Iran
Vera Drake
Vice (magazine)
Victor/Victoria
Victor Garber
Victoria Affair
Vietnam War
Viggo Mortensen
Viola Davis
Virginia
Virginia Madsen
Vladimir Tismăneanu
Voice of America
Vojtech Mastny (historian)
WALL-E
Wahhabism
Walter LaFeber
Walter Laqueur
Waltz with Bashir
War in Vietnam (1945–1946)
War of Attrition
War on terror
Warner Bros. Pictures
Warner Bros. Studios, Burbank
Warner Communications
Warren H. Carroll
Warsaw Pact
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
Warsaw Uprising
Washington, D.C.
Water supply and sanitation in Iran
Wayback Machine
We All Loved Each Other So Much
We will bury you
Weighted average
Welfare Party
Wes Bentley
West Side Story (1961 film)
Western Bloc
Western Powers
Western Sahara War
Western Sahara conflict
Western betrayal
When the Levee Breaks
White House
White Revolution
White nationalism
White supremacy
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (film)
Wildlife of Iran
Willem Drees
William Appleman Williams
William B. Pickett
William Fichtner
William Goldenberg
Wings (1927 film)
Winston Duke
Winston Peters
Winter's Bone
Wired (magazine)
Women's rights in Iran
Women's rights movement in Iran
Women in Iran
Woody Harrelson
Yahya Abdul-Mateen II
Yakov M. Rabkin
Yalta Conference
Yarmouk Military Industrial Complex
Years of Lead (Italy)
Yemeni unification
Yemenite War of 1972
Yemenite War of 1979
Yom Kippur War
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Young Kashgar Party
Yusuf al-Qaradawi
Zach Galifianakis
Zakir Naik
Zand dynasty
Zena Sheardown
Zero Dark Thirty
Ziaur Rahman
Zionism
Zionist entity
Ziyarid dynasty
Zoroastrianism in Iran
Željko Ivanek
http://www.filmapia.com/published/scenes?placeId=1825&movie=argo
http://www.upi.com/Entertainment_News/Movies/2011/09/12/Affleck-starts-shooting-Argo-film-in-LA/UPI-30821315856942/
http://www.soundtrack.net/movie/argo
http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/oct/11/movie-review-argo/
http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20121010/REVIEWS/121019999
http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/29/the-argo-caper/
http://consortiumnews.com/2013/03/07/october-surprise-and-argo/
http://www.juancole.com/2013/02/orientalism-upsets-iranians.html
http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Argo-Blu-ray/57932/
http://uk.eonline.com/news/377346/ben-affleck-s-oscars-snub-bradley-cooper-seth-macfarlane-think-argo-director-was-robbed
http://movies.ndtv.com/hollywood/quentin-tarantino-thinks-ben-affleck-s-oscar-snub-was-worse-than-his-316115
http://www.digitalhit.com/galleries/42/614/
http://bc.ctvnews.ca/argo-iran-hostage-crisis-film-fiddles-with-the-facts-1.1167994
http://www.politico.com/blogs/click/2013/02/jimmy-carter-argo-great-but-inaccurate-157592.html
http://www.3news.co.nz/Opinion-Ben-Affleck-must-apologise-to-NZ-for-Argos-deception/tabid/1382/articleID/288296/Default.aspx
http://www.3news.co.nz/NZs-role-in-Iran-crisis-tainted-in-Afflecks-film-Argo/tabid/418/articleID/273069/Default.aspx
http://www.btlnews.com/awards/contender-director-of-photography-rodrigo-prieto-argo/
https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/winter99-00/art1.html
http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/oct/10/hollywood-cant-make-this-up-argo-recounts-the-cia-/?page=all
http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2012/10/12/argo_true_story_the_facts_and_fiction_behind_the_ben_affleck_movie.html
http://www.hollywoodsign.org/the-history-of-the-sign/1978-a-sign-is-reborn/
http://www.askthepilot.com/argo-gets-it-wrong/
http://www.thenewspaper.ca/news/diplomats-iranian-hostage-crisis-discuss-argo
https://news.vice.com/article/cia-helped-produce-top-chef-covert-affairs
http://fair.org/home/cias-work-with-filmmakers-puts-all-media-workers-at-risk/
https://news.vice.com/article/tequila-painted-pearls-and-prada-how-the-cia-helped-produce-zero-dark-thirty
https://web.archive.org/web/20121109035540/http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118031570
https://web.archive.org/web/20121109035626/http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118038411
https://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/05/world/americas/john-sheardown-canadian-who-sheltered-americans-in-tehran-dies-at-88.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/17/opinion/sunday/dowd-the-oscar-for-best-fabrication.html
https://www.theglobeandmail.com/arts/film/jian-ghomeshi-argo-is-crowd-pleasing-entertaining-and-unfair-to-iranians/article4855769/
https://www.thestar.com/entertainment/tiff/article/1255390--tiff-2012-how-canadian-hero-ken-taylor-was-snubbed-by-argo
https://www.thestar.com/entertainment/article/1258706--ben-affleck-changes-argo-postscript-for-ken-taylor
https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/article/1267937--argo-film-gives-former-canadian-ambassador-ken-taylor-chance-to-set-the-record-straight
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt1024648/
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/9622647/Ben-Afflecks-new-film-Argo-upsets-British-diplomats-who-helped-Americans-in-Iran.html
https://www.npr.org/2013/02/22/172600588/affleck-on-argo-and-the-1979-hostage-crisis
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-21003432
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=argo.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/argo_2012
https://www.warnerbros.com/argo
https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/16/movies/lincoln-and-amour-top-stephen-holdens-best-of-list.html
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887323854904578263610160724572
https://www.parliament.nz/en/pb/hansard-debates/rhr/document/50HansD_20130312_00000008/motions-human-rights-fiji-treatment-of-detainees-iran
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/ben-affleck-argo-odd-hollywood-history-374054
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/argo
https://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/argo-2012-0
https://www.variety.com/article/VR1118031570
https://www.variety.com/article/VR1118038411
https://www.deadline.com/2012/12/oscars-argo-production-design/
https://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/cinema/2012/10/15/121015crci_cinema_lane
https://www.thewrap.com/movies-you-loved-or-hated-films-got-or-f-cinemascores-photos-90331/5/
https://articles.latimes.com/2012/nov/03/world/la-fg-iran-argo-20121104
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q59653#identifiers
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/10/16/ken-taylor-the-main-hero-of-iran-hostage-escape-dies-at-81/
https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/archives/speech/remarks-presenting-congressional-gold-medal-kenneth-taylor-former-canadian
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=3554&p=.htm
http://www.macleans.ca/2012/09/12/ben-affleck-rewrites-history/#more-292541
https://www.rogerebert.com/roger-ebert/toronto-4-and-the-winner-is
https://www.theatlantic.com/culture/archive/2013/03/new-zealand-argo-misled-world/317123/
https://viaf.org/viaf/176080485
https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2012/nov/13/argo-iranians-ben-affleck
https://www.airliners.net/photo/Swissair/McDonnell-Douglas-DC-8-62/139560
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987009950811305171
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q59653#P1712
https://web.archive.org/web/20121015195817/http://www.thestar.com/entertainment/tiff/article/1255390--tiff-2012-how-canadian-hero-ken-taylor-was-snubbed-by-argo
https://web.archive.org/web/20160215213320/http://www.thenewspaper.ca/news/diplomats-iranian-hostage-crisis-discuss-argo
https://www.wired.com/2007/04/cia-rescue-americans-from-tehran
https://web.archive.org/web/20070613112038/https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/winter99-00/art1.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130121193941/http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20121010/REVIEWS/121019999
https://web.archive.org/web/20131102184353/http://movies.ndtv.com/hollywood/quentin-tarantino-thinks-ben-affleck-s-oscar-snub-was-worse-than-his-316115
https://web.archive.org/web/20131202221354/http://www.3news.co.nz/Opinion-Ben-Affleck-must-apologise-to-NZ-for-Argos-deception/tabid/1382/articleID/288296/Default.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20150213011911/http://www.hollywoodsign.org/the-history-of-the-sign/1978-a-sign-is-reborn/
https://www.vulture.com/2012/10/ben-affleck-argo-interview.html
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no2013026908
https://web.archive.org/web/20131225072436/http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/argo-2012-0
https://web.archive.org/web/20130329050527/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=argo.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20230411233752/https://www.vulture.com/2012/10/ben-affleck-argo-interview.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20131219182237/http://www.filmapia.com/published/scenes?placeId=1825&movie=argo
https://web.archive.org/web/20181231114236/https://www.upi.com/Entertainment_News/Movies/2011/09/12/Affleck-starts-shooting-Argo-film-in-LA/UPI-30821315856942/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150104162717/http://www.btlnews.com/awards/contender-director-of-photography-rodrigo-prieto-argo/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130312195500/http://www.soundtrack.net/movie/argo
https://web.archive.org/web/20140704112352/http://www.deadline.com/2012/12/oscars-argo-production-design/
https://web.archive.org/web/20161223134522/http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/ben-affleck-argo-odd-hollywood-history-374054
https://web.archive.org/web/20161205160432/https://news.vice.com/article/cia-helped-produce-top-chef-covert-affairs
https://web.archive.org/web/20161205160428/http://fair.org/home/cias-work-with-filmmakers-puts-all-media-workers-at-risk/
https://web.archive.org/web/20161205160430/https://news.vice.com/article/tequila-painted-pearls-and-prada-how-the-cia-helped-produce-zero-dark-thirty
https://web.archive.org/web/20170731160601/http://www.thewrap.com/movies-you-loved-or-hated-films-got-or-f-cinemascores-photos-90331/5/
https://web.archive.org/web/20121216173456/http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/16/movies/lincoln-and-amour-top-stephen-holdens-best-of-list.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20171104170224/http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/oct/11/movie-review-argo/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210604201846/https://www.rogerebert.com/roger-ebert/toronto-4-and-the-winner-is
https://web.archive.org/web/20130117171740/http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/29/the-argo-caper/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130803050333/http://consortiumnews.com/2013/03/07/october-surprise-and-argo/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130108020011/http://www.theglobeandmail.com/arts/film/jian-ghomeshi-argo-is-crowd-pleasing-entertaining-and-unfair-to-iranians/article4855769/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130303160712/http://www.juancole.com/2013/02/orientalism-upsets-iranians.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151019014104/http://articles.latimes.com/2012/nov/03/world/la-fg-iran-argo-20121104
https://web.archive.org/web/20230824005256/https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887323854904578263610160724572
https://web.archive.org/web/20130909205005/http://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2012/nov/13/argo-iranians-ben-affleck
https://web.archive.org/web/20181221001143/https://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=3554&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20130119180640/http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Argo-Blu-ray/57932/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230824005331/https://www.eonline.com/news/377346/ben-affleck-s-oscars-snub-bradley-cooper-seth-macfarlane-think-argo-director-was-robbed
https://web.archive.org/web/20140727002601/http://www.digitalhit.com/galleries/42/614/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130226003944/http://bc.ctvnews.ca/argo-iran-hostage-crisis-film-fiddles-with-the-facts-1.1167994
https://web.archive.org/web/20120919070233/http://www2.macleans.ca/2012/09/12/ben-affleck-rewrites-history/#more-292541
https://web.archive.org/web/20130103172414/http://www.thestar.com/entertainment/article/1258706--ben-affleck-changes-argo-postscript-for-ken-taylor
https://web.archive.org/web/20121103153450/http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/article/1267937--argo-film-gives-former-canadian-ambassador-ken-taylor-chance-to-set-the-record-straight
https://web.archive.org/web/20130225034757/http://www.politico.com/blogs/click/2013/02/jimmy-carter-argo-great-but-inaccurate-157592.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20210304030353/https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/archives/speech/remarks-presenting-congressional-gold-medal-kenneth-taylor-former-canadian
https://web.archive.org/web/20210106163720/https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/10/16/ken-taylor-the-main-hero-of-iran-hostage-escape-dies-at-81/
https://web.archive.org/web/20131202221351/http://www.3news.co.nz/NZs-role-in-Iran-crisis-tainted-in-Afflecks-film-Argo/tabid/418/articleID/273069/Default.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20121023140358/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/9622647/Ben-Afflecks-new-film-Argo-upsets-British-diplomats-who-helped-Americans-in-Iran.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20181222173118/https://www.parliament.nz/en/pb/hansard-debates/rhr/document/50HansD_20130312_00000008/motions-human-rights-fiji-treatment-of-detainees-iran
https://web.archive.org/web/20210709183655/https://www.theatlantic.com/culture/archive/2013/03/new-zealand-argo-misled-world/317123/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130225053329/http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-21003432
https://web.archive.org/web/20160117030232/http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/oct/10/hollywood-cant-make-this-up-argo-recounts-the-cia-/?page=all
https://web.archive.org/web/20130117200545/http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/05/world/americas/john-sheardown-canadian-who-sheltered-americans-in-tehran-dies-at-88.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20121114122010/http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2012/10/12/argo_true_story_the_facts_and_fiction_behind_the_ben_affleck_movie.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130224074216/http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/17/opinion/sunday/dowd-the-oscar-for-best-fabrication.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20150907171516/http://www.askthepilot.com/argo-gets-it-wrong/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220102100938/https://www.airliners.net/photo/Swissair/McDonnell-Douglas-DC-8-62/139560
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q59653#P444
https://web.archive.org/web/20230629212444/https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/argo_2012
https://web.archive.org/web/20230528185309/https://www.metacritic.com/movie/argo/
