Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (sometimes spelled as Around the World in Eighty Days) is a 1956 American epic adventure-comedy film starring David Niven, Cantinflas, Robert Newton and Shirley MacLaine, produced by the Michael Todd Company and released by United Artists.
The picture was directed by Michael Anderson and produced by Mike Todd, with Kevin McClory and William Cameron Menzies as associate producers. The screenplay, based on the classic 1873 novel of the same name by Jules Verne, was written by James Poe, John Farrow, and S.J. Perelman. The music score was composed by Victor Young, and the Todd-AO 70 mm cinematography (shot in Technicolor) was by Lionel Lindon. The film's six-minute-long animated title sequence, shown at the end of the film, was created by award-winning designer Saul Bass.The film won five Academy Awards, including Best Picture.


== Plot ==
Broadcast journalist Edward R. Murrow presents an onscreen prologue, featuring footage from A Trip to the Moon (1902) by Georges Méliès, explaining that it is based loosely on the book From the Earth to the Moon by Jules Verne. Also included is the launching of an unmanned rocket and footage of the earth receding.
In 1872, an English gentleman Phileas Fogg claims he can circumnavigate the world in eighty days. Met with scepticism, he makes a £20,000 wager (worth about £1.9 million today) with four fellow members of the Reform Club (each contributing £5,000 to the bet) that he can make the journey and arrive back at the club eighty days from exactly 8:45 pm that evening.
Together with his resourceful French valet, Passepartout, Fogg goes hopscotching around the globe generously spending money to encourage others to help him get to his destinations faster so he can accommodate tight steamship schedules. Having reached Paris they hear that a tunnel under the Alps is blocked. The Thomas Cook agent who assists them offers to hire or sell them his hot air balloon. Fogg buys it and they fly over the Alps drinking champagne.
Blown off-course, the two accidentally end up in Spain, where we see a table-top flamenco sequence performed in a bar. Later, Passepartout engages in a comic bullfight. Next, they go to Brindisi in Italy. Meanwhile, back in London, suspicion grows that Fogg has stolen £55,000 (around £5.2 million today) from the Bank of England so Police Inspector Fix is sent out by Scotland Yard to trail him (starting in Suez) but must keep waiting for a warrant to arrive so he can arrest Fogg in the British controlled ports they visit.
In India, Fogg and Passepartout rescue beautiful young widow Aouda from being forced into a funeral pyre with her late husband. The three then travel to Hong Kong, Yokohama, San Francisco, and the Wild West (including the Sioux Nation). Reaching New York, they arrange their passage on a cargo steamship travelling to Venezuela – Fogg bribes the captain to go to England. Alas, they run out of coal mid-ocean and the ship stops. Fogg buys the ship and then instructs the crew to take everything that burns, including lifeboats, to provide fuel.
They arrive in Liverpool, where, still with just enough time left to travel to London and win his wager, Fogg is promptly arrested by the diligent yet misguided Inspector Fix.
Detaining Fogg at the police station, the embarrassed Fix discovers that the real culprit has already been apprehended by police in Brighton. Although Fogg is exculpated and free to go, he now has insufficient time to reach London before his deadline, and so has lost everything but the enduring love of the winsome Aouda. Upon returning to London, Fogg asks Passepartout to arrange a church wedding for the next day, Monday. Salvation comes when Passepartout is shocked to be informed that the next day is actually Sunday. Fogg then realizes that by traveling east towards the rising sun and crossing the International Date Line, he has gained a day. Thus, there is still just enough time to reach the Reform Club and win the bet. Fogg rushes to the club, arriving just before the 8:45 pm chime. Passepartout and Aouda then arrive behind him, inadvertently shocking everyone, as no woman has ever entered the Reform Club before.


== Cast ==
The film boasts an all-star cast, with David Niven and Cantinflas in the lead roles of Fogg and Passepartout. Fogg is the classic Victorian upper-class English gentleman, well-dressed, well-spoken, and extremely punctual, whereas his servant Passepartout (who has an eye for the ladies) provides much of the comic relief as a "jack of all trades" for the film in contrast to his master's strict formality. Joining them are Shirley MacLaine as the beautiful Indian Princess Aouda and Robert Newton as the determined but hapless Detective Fix, in his last role. Suzanne Alexander and Marla English were initially the finalists for the role of Princess Aouda, but it was given to MacLaine, who accepted the role after having turned it down twice. Others who tested for the role were Sylvia Lewis, Lisa Davis, Audrey Conti, Eleanore Tanin, Eugenia Paul, Joan Elan, and Jaqueline Park.
The role of Passepartout was greatly expanded from the novel to accommodate Cantinflas, the most famous Latin-American comedian at the time, and he winds up stealing the film. While Passepartout describes himself as a Parisian in the novel, this is unclear in the film – he has a French name, but speaks fluent Spanish when he and his master arrive in Spain by balloon. In the Spanish version, the name of his character was changed from the French Passepartout to the Spanish Juan Picaporte, the name the character has in the early Spanish translations of the novel. There is also a comic bullfighting sequence which was especially created for Cantinflas and is not in the novel. Indeed, when the film was released in some Spanish-speaking nations, Cantinflas was billed as the lead. According to the guidebook, this was done because of an obstacle Todd faced in casting Cantinflas, who had never previously appeared in an American movie and had turned down numerous offers to do so. Todd allowed him to appear in the film as a Latin, "so," the actor said himself, "...to my audience in Latin America, I'll still be Cantinflas."
More than 40 famous performers make brief cameo appearances, including Charles Boyer, Marlene Dietrich, Ronald Colman, Peter Lorre, Charles Coburn, Noël Coward, Buster Keaton, George Raft, Cesar Romero, Red Skelton and Frank Sinatra. The film was significant as the first of the so-called Hollywood "make work" films, employing dozens of film personalities. John Wayne turned down Todd's offer for the role of the Colonel leading the Cavalry charge, a role filled by Colonel Tim McCoy. James Cagney, Gary Cooper, and Kirk Douglas—along with Wayne—were considered for the role, but according to Michael Todd, "they all wanted to kid it." Promotional material released at the time quoted a Screen Actors Guild representative looking at the shooting call sheet and crying: "Good heavens Todd, you've made extras out of all the stars in Hollywood!" As of 2023, Shirley MacLaine and Glynis Johns are the last surviving members of the billed cast, as well as the uncredited Marion Ross.


=== Main cast ===
David Niven as Phileas Fogg
Cantinflas as Passepartout
Shirley MacLaine as Princess Aouda
Robert Newton as Inspector Fix


==== Cameo appearances ====


== Production ==
Around the World in 80 Days was produced by Broadway showman Michael Todd based the film on a Around the World musical and book by Orson Welles. not to mention  Jules Verne's adventure novel. Todd had never before produced a film. The director he hired, Michael Anderson, had directed the highly acclaimed British World War II feature The Dam Busters (1955), George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four feature (1956), and other classic films. Todd sold his interest in the Todd-AO format to help finance the film.Because Todd-AO ran at 30 frames per second, which was incompatible with the 35mm standard of 24 fps, Around the World in 80 Days was filmed twice, like the first feature in Todd-AO, Oklahoma!. Unlike Oklahoma!, however, which was filmed additionally in 35mm CinemaScope, Around the World in 80 Days was filmed simultaneously in Todd-AO at 24 frames per second so that from this negative, 35mm reduction prints could be produced for general release. After these two films, the specification for Todd-AO was altered after the third film in the format, South Pacific, to 24 fps running, making it unnecessary to film subsequent productions twice.
In his 1971 autobiographical book The Moon's a Balloon, actor David Niven discussed his meeting with Todd and the subsequent events that led to the film being produced. According to Niven, when Todd asked him if he would appear as Fogg, Niven enthusiastically replied, 'I'd do it for nothing!' He later admitted to being grateful that Todd did not hold him to his claim. He also described the first meeting between Todd and Robert Newton (who had  drinking problems) when the latter was offered the role of the detective, Fix; Niven alleged that Newton was offered the part on condition that he did not drink any alcohol during the filming, and that his celebration following the completion of his role led to his untimely demise (he did not live to see the film released).
Filming took place in late 1955, from August 9 to December 20. The crew worked fast (75 actual days of filming), producing 680,000 feet (210,000 m) of film, which was edited down to 25,734 feet (7,844 m) of finished film. The picture cost just under $6 million to make, employing 112 locations in 13 countries and 140 sets. Todd said he and the crew visited every country portrayed in the picture, including England, France, India, East Pakistan (now Bangladesh), Spain, Thailand, and Japan. According to Time magazine's review of the film, the cast, including extras, totaled 68,894 people; it also featured 7,959 animals, "including four ostriches, six skunks, 15 elephants, 17 fighting bulls, 512 rhesus monkeys, 800 horses, 950 burros, 2,448 American buffalo, 3,800 Rocky Mountain sheep and a sacred cow that eats flowers on cue". There is also a cat at the Reform Club. The wardrobe department spent $410,000 to provide 74,685 costumes and 36,092 trinkets. This is allegedly the most costumes ever required for a Hollywood production.

Some 10,000 extras were used in filming the bullfight scene in Spain, with Cantinflas as the matador; Cantinflas had previously done some bullfighting. They used all 6,500 residents of a small Spanish town called Chinchón, 45 kilometres (28 mi) from Madrid, but Todd decided there were not enough spectators, so he found 3,500 more from nearby towns. He used 650 Indians for a fight on a train in the West. Many were indeed Indians, but some were Hollywood extras. All 650 had their skin color altered with dye. Todd used about 50 US gallons (190 L; 42 imp gal) of orange-coloured dye for those extras.
Todd sometimes used models of boats, ships, and trains in the film, but he often decided that they did not look realistic so he switched to the real thing where he could. The scene of a collapsing train bridge is partly without models. The overhead shot of a train crossing a bridge was full scale, but the bridge collapse was a large-scale miniature, verifiable by observing the slightly jerky motion of the rear passenger car as the train pulls away, as well as the slowed-down water droplets which are out of scale in the splashing river below. All the steamships shown in the first half are miniatures shot in an outdoor studio tank. The exception is the American ship shown at the intermission point, which is real. The "American" ship is the Japanese training barque Kaiwo Maru. A tunnel was built for a train sequence out of paper mache. After the train filming was complete, the "tunnel" was pushed over into the gorge. Many of the special effects are described and pictured in a 1956 Popular Mechanics article.The scenes of the crossing of the Atlantic Ocean by steamship took place off San Francisco and were shot on a specially built prop steamer, a converted barge mocked up to resemble a small ocean-going steamship, with mock paddles driven by the electric motor from an old streetcar. In his memoirs, Niven described the whole thing as being dangerously unstable (though stability improved as it was dismantled as though to feed it into its own furnaces as the plot required).
One of the most famous sequences in the film, the flight by hydrogen balloon, is not in the original Jules Verne novel. Because the film was made in Todd-AO, the sequence was expressly created to show off the locations seen on the flight, as projected on the giant curved screen used for the process. A similar balloon flight can be found in an earlier Jules Verne novel, Five Weeks in a Balloon, in which the protagonists explore Africa from a hydrogen balloon.Many of the balloon scenes with Niven and Cantinflas were filmed using a 160-foot (49 m) crane. Even that height bothered Niven, who was afraid of heights. Tom Burges, who was shorter than Niven, was used as a stand-in for scenes where the balloon is seen from a distance. Many of the lots used in the film are now on the land occupied by Century City, an office complex in the Los Angeles area.
In his memoirs, Niven related that Todd completed filming while in considerable debt. The post-production work on the film was an exercise in holding off Todd's creditors long enough to produce a saleable film, and the footage was worked upon under the supervision of Todd's creditors and returned to a secure vault each night, as if it were in escrow.
The film's release and subsequent success vindicated Todd's considerable efforts.


== Release ==
The film premiered on October 17, 1956, at the Rivoli Theater in New York City and played to full houses for 15 months. It ran for 102 weeks at the theatre, with 1,564 performances, 2,173,238 patrons and a gross of $4,872,326.It topped Variety's monthly box office chart for seven months during 1957. By the time of Todd's death in a private plane crash, 18 months after the film had opened, it had grossed $33 million.By November 1958, the film had earned worldwide rentals of $22 million including $4.6 million from overseas from just 280 engagements. None of the overseas engagements at that date had been in Todd-AO.In Spanish and Latin American posters and programs of the movie, Cantinflas is billed above the other players because he was very popular in Spanish-speaking countries. There were two souvenir programmes sold in theatres. For Roadshow screenings Todd-AO is mentioned, though for general release those pages are not contained in the book.  The programme was created by Todd's publicist, Art Cohn, who died in the plane crash with him. His biography, The Nine Lives of Michael Todd, was published after their deaths which put a macabre spin on the title.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Bosley Crowther called the film a "sprawling conglomeration of refined English comedy, giant-screen travel panoramics and slam-bang Keystone burlesque" and wrote that Todd and the film's crew "commandeered the giant screen and stereophonic sound as though they were Olsen and Johnson turned loose in a cosmic cutting-room, with a pipe organ in one corner and all the movies ever made to toss around".Time magazine called it "brassy, extravagant, long-winded and funny" and the "Polyphemus of productions," writing "as a travelogue, Around the World is at least as spectacular as anything Cinerama has slapped together". Time highlighted the performance of "the famous Mexican comic, Cantinflas [who in] his first U.S. movie ... gives delightful evidence that he may well be, as Charles Chaplin once said he was, "the world's greatest clown".Rotten Tomatoes retrospectively collected 45 reviews and gave the film an aggregate score of 71%, with an average rating of 5.90/10, with the site's consensus stating: "It's undeniably shallow, but its cheerful lack of pretense -- as well as its grand scale and star-stuffed cast -- help make Around the World in 80 Days charmingly light-hearted entertainment".
The development of the film and the personal life of actor Mario Moreno during that time were dramatized later in the 2014 film Cantinflas.


=== Accolades ===
The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards, winning five (including Best Picture), beating out critically and publicly praised films: Friendly Persuasion, Giant, The King and I and The Ten Commandments. It is also one of the few Best Picture winners not to be nominated in any acting category.
Although not nominated for Best Original Song, the film's theme song "Around the World" (music by Victor Young; lyrics by Harold Adamson), became very popular. It was a hit for Bing Crosby in 1957, and was a staple of the easy-listening genre for many years: "Around the world, I searched for you / I traveled on when hope was gone to keep a rendezvous ... No more will I go all around the world / For I have found my world in you."
The film was screened at the 1957 Cannes Film Festival, but was not entered into the main competition.


=== Anniversary celebration ===
On the first anniversary of the film's release, Todd threw a party at the Madison Square Garden attended by
18,000 people; Time magazine called the party a "spectacular flop" though Todd shrugged off the remark, saying, "You can't say it was a little bust." The event, featured on a 90-minute CBS telecast, could boast of "a colossal hodgepodge of bagpipers, folk dancers, Philadelphia Mummers, Russian wolfhounds, oxen, Siamese cats, elephants, clowns, a fire engine, and a symphony orchestra."


== Distribution and ownership ==
The film was originally distributed by United Artists in two Todd-AO 70 mm versions, one for Todd-AO 70 mm release at 30 frames per second, and an alternative 70 mm version at 24 frames per second reduced to 35 mm for general release.
The original Todd-AO 70mm running time without the extra music was 179 minutes. However, after the Chicago showing Todd cut four minutes out of the Western sequence where Cantinflas is pursued by Indians. The 70mm print shown at The Rivoli theatre in NYC was 175 minutes. However, the original 35mm Technicolor/anamorphic magnetic stereo and mono optical prints ran the complete 179 minutes with the chase scene intact. Although the leaders on the optical sound prints were labelled for Perspecta directional encoding, the prints do not contain the signal and were standard mono.
In 1968, additional cuts were made including removing most of the prologue with the changing aspect ratios. Only a brief few shots with Edward R. Murrow remained and the entire "Trip to the Moon" clips were cut. Since the opening shot of Murrow was 1.33 window boxed in the wide frame, they had to crop and blow up that shot for the 2.35 ratio which made it very grainy. The intermission was also cut for the 1968 re-release which included the freeze frame of the ship and fade into the second half. The reels just
jump cut with an awkward sound gap between the first and second half. The chase scene was missing from this version too which reduced the running time to 167 minutes. However, some uncut 179-minute 35mm Technicolor prints were struck too which meant at least some theatres played the Roadshow version even though the vast majority showed the shorter cut. 35mm IB/Scope copies of both versions exist from 1968. The 24 frames per second 70mm prints were also the 167-minute version in that year too. As a publicity stunt, Todd Jr. called the press when he removed a 70mm copy from a bank vault claiming it had been stored there since 1956 for safe keeping and was being shown at a theatre again. The copy they exhibited was the cut re-issue 167-minute version.
Around 1976, after its last network television broadcast on CBS, United Artists lost control of the film to Elizabeth Taylor, who was the widow of producer Michael Todd and had inherited a portion of Todd's estate. In 1983, Warner Bros. acquired the rights to the film from Taylor, and reissued the film theatrically in a re-edited 143-minute version (this version would subsequently air only once on Turner Classic Movies, this was before any restoration on the movie was announced). In the years that followed, a pan-and-scan transfer of the alternative 24 frame/s version (presented at its full 183-minute length) was shown on cable television.
In 2004, Warner Bros. issued a digitally restored version of the 24 frame/s incarnation on DVD, also at its full 183-minute length, but also including the original intermission, Entr'acte, and exit music segments that were a part of the original 1956 theatrical release, and for the first time on home video at its original 2.2:1 aspect widescreen ratio.
This restored version was reconstructed from the best available elements of the 24 frame/s edition Warner Bros. could find, and was subsequently shown on Turner Classic Movies. The original elements from the 30 frame/s/70 mm Todd-AO version (as well as the original prints derived from these elements) still exist, albeit in faded condition due to the passage of time, but remain to be formally restored by Warner Bros. There is some missing footage in the India train ride where the image artificially fades in and out to compensate for the missing shots.
Warner Bros. retained Andy Pratt Film Labs who in conjunction with Eastman Kodak developed a method to remove the cracked and faded-to-brown, clear lacquer from the original 65 mm Technicolor negative. Warners did nothing further to restore the negative. Due to costs of making a 70 mm release print even without magnetic striping, using DTS disk for audio, there are no immediate plans for any new prints. The 65 mm roadshow print negative was used for the DVD release. Had any 35 mm Anamorphic elements been used the aspect ratio would have been 2.35:1. Mike Todd had limited 35 mm anamorphic prints made with a non-standard compression ratio to provide a 2.21:1 viewing experience. These special 35 mm prints are called Cinestage, the same name of Mike Todd's showcase theatre in Chicago.
Best available prints of the 30 frame/s/70 mm version have recently been exhibited in revival movie houses worldwide. As of the present time, Warner Bros. remains the film's rights holder.


== Soundtrack and home media ==
The DVDs for Around the World in 80 Days include four hours of supplemental material, in addition to the restored three-hour wide-screen presentation. Included on one of the disks is a documentary film, about 50 minutes long, about Michael Todd.
The soundtrack was commercially released on vinyl and audio tape. Two CD versions were released as well, including a digital remastering of the original Decca album on MCA in the 1980s and an expanded version with extra tracks on the Hit Parade Records label in Canada in 2007. There was also a model kit of the balloon, a board game, and a Dell Comics adaptation. A Cantinflas puppet was released separately, dressed in an outfit similar to the Passepartout costume.


== Theme parks ==
During the 1970-80s, the Alton Towers theme park in England had a car ride based on the film.


== See also ==
List of American films of 1956


== References ==


== External links ==

Around the World in Eighty Days at IMDb 
Around the World in Eighty Days at Rotten Tomatoes
Around the World in 80 Days at AllMovie
Around the World in 80 Days at the TCM Movie Database
Around the World in Eighty Days at the American Film Institute Catalog
Alternate prologue from in70mm.com12 Years a Slave (film)
14th Golden Globe Awards
1917 (2019 film)
1956 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
1957 Cannes Film Festival
1984 (1956 film)
20,000 Leagues Under the Sea (1997 Hallmark film)
29th Academy Awards
70 mm film
80 Days (2005 video game)
80 Days (2014 video game)
9th Directors Guild of America Awards
9th Writers Guild of America Awards
A. E. Matthews
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Boy Scout Around the World
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Desperate Crime
A Dinner Under Difficulties
A Drama in Livonia
A Drama in Mexico
A Drama in the Air
A Fake Diamond Swindler
A Fantastical Meal
A Floating City
A Funny Mahometan
A Grandmother's Story
A Hypnotist at Work
A Lightning Sketch
A Love Tragedy in Spain
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Mesmerian Experiment
A Miracle Under the Inquisition
A Mix-up in the Gallery
A Moonlight Serenade
A Most Violent Year
A Mysterious Portrait
A Nephew from America
A Nightmare
A Novice at X-Rays
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Priest in 1839
A Private Dinner
A Roadside Inn
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Seaside Flirtation
A Serpentine Dance
A Spiritualistic Photographer
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
A Terrible Night
A Tricky Painter's Fate
A Trip to the Moon
A Wager Between Two Magicians, or Jealous of Myself
A Winter amid the Ice
Academy Award
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Original Song
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Awards
Addition and Subtraction
Adventure film
Adventures of William Tell
Adventures of the Rat Family
After the Ball (1897 film)
Alan Mowbray
Alcofrisbas, the Master Magician
All-star cast
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All the Fine Young Cannibals
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Alton Towers
Amadeus (film)
Amarcord
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Hustle
An Adventurous Automobile Trip
An American in Paris (film)
An Antarctic Mystery
An Hallucinated Alchemist
An Ideal City
An Up-to-Date Conjuror
Andy Devine
Animation World Network
Anne of the Thousand Days
Annie Hall
Aouda
Archive.org
Argo (2012 film)
Around the Moon
Around the World
Around the World (1956 song)
Around the World (musical)
Around the World in 20 Years
Around the World in 80 Days (1988 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (2004 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (2009 TV series)
Around the World in 80 Days (2021 TV series)
Around the World in 80 Days (2021 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (Alton Towers)
Around the World in 80 Days (Palin book)
Around the World in 80 Days (board game)
Around the World in 80 Days (miniseries)
Around the World in 80 Days (play)
Around the World in 80 Days (video game)
Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin
Around the World in Eighty Days
Around the World in Eighty Days (1919 film)
Around the World in Eighty Days (1972 TV series)
Around the World in Seventy-Two Days
Around the World with Willy Fog
Arrival of a Train (Joinville Station)
Atonement (2007 film)
Avatar (2009 film)
Babel (film)
Backwards to Britain
Bank of England
Baron Munchausen's Dream
Barry Lyndon
Basil Sydney
Beatrice Lillie
Becket (1964 film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Betrayal (1983 film)
Between Calais and Dover
Bicycle Thieves
Bing Crosby
Birdman (film)
Blind Man's Buff (play)
Blue Beard (1901 film)
Bob Kick, the Mischievous Kid
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Bosley Crowther
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Braveheart
Brindisi
Broadcast News (film)
Brokeback Mountain
Bugsy
Bullfight
Buncoed Stage Johnnie
Buster Keaton
CBS
CBS World News Roundup
CODA (2021 film)
Cabaret (1972 film)
Cantinflas
Cantinflas (film)
Captain Antifer
Captain Nemo
Captains Courageous (1996 film)
Carol (film)
Casablanca (film)
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Cedric Hardwicke
Century City, Los Angeles, California
Cesar Romero
Chariots of Fire
Charles Boyer
Charles Chaplin
Charles Coburn
Chase a Crooked Shadow
Chicago (2002 film)
China Versus Allied Powers
Chinatown (1974 film)
Chinchón
Christ Walking on the Water
Cimarron (1931 film)
Cinderella (1899 film)
Cinderella or the Glass Slipper
Cinerama
Citizen Kane
Claudius Bombarnac
Clovis Dardentor
Comedian Paulus Singing
Comedy film
Conduct Unbecoming (1975 film)
Confessions of a Nazi Spy
Conjurer Making Ten Hats in Sixty Seconds
Conjuring (1896 film)
Coppelia, the Animated Doll
Crash (2004 film)
Cries and Whispers
Crying and Laughing
Cyrus Smith
César Cascabel
D. Devant, Conjurer
Da 5 Bloods
Dances with Wolves
Dancing in a Harem
Darling (1965 film)
David Farragut
David Niven
Day for Night (film)
Days of Heaven
Decca Records
Delirium in a Studio
Dell Comics
Dick Sand, A Captain at Fifteen
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Dislocation Extraordinary
Divers at Work on the Wreck of the "Maine"
Doc Savage: The Man of Bronze
Doctor Ox
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dominique (1978 film)
Dr. Ox's Experiment
Drive My Car (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
East of Eden (film)
Edmund Lowe
Edward Murrow Award (Overseas Press Club of America)
Edward R. Murrow
Edward R. Murrow Award (Corporation for Public Broadcasting)
Edward R. Murrow Award (Radio Television Digital News Association)
Edward R. Murrow Award (Washington State University)
Edward R. Murrow Award for Excellence in Public Diplomacy
Edward R. Murrow College of Communication
Edward R. Murrow High School
Edward R. Murrow Park
Eight Hundred Leagues on the Amazon
Eleven Days' Siege
Elizabeth Taylor
Empire of the Sun (film)
Entr'acte
Epic film
Escrow
Evelyn Keyes
Every Man His Own Cigar Lighter
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Excelsior!
Extraordinary Illusions (1903 film)
Facing the Flag
Family Without a Name
Fandango Media
Far from Heaven
Far from the Madding Crowd (1967 film)
Fargo (1996 film)
Fat and Lean Wrestling Match
Faust and Marguerite (1904 film)
Felix Felton
Fernandel
Filmsite.org
Finding Neverland (film)
Finlay Currie
First Cow
Five Easy Pieces
Five Weeks in a Balloon
Flight from Ashiya
Forrest Gump
Fortune Favors the Brave (film)
Foundling Mick
Frank Sinatra
Frederick Leister
French Cops Learning English
Friendly Persuasion (1956 film)
From Here to Eternity
From the Earth to the Moon
Frritt-Flacc
Fun With the Bridal Party
Gandhi (film)
Gary Cooper
Gaston Méliès
Gene Ruggiero
Gentleman's Agreement
George Orwell
George Raft
Georges Méliès
Georges Méliès bibliography
Georges Méliès filmography
Georges Méliès in culture
Giant (1956 film)
Gigi (1958 film)
Gil Braltar
Gilbert Roland
Gladiator (2000 film)
Glynis Johns
Godfrey Morgan
Gods and Monsters (film)
Going My Way
Going to Bed Under Difficulties
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Gone with the Wind (film)
Good Glue Sticks
Good Night, and Good Luck
Goodfellas
Grand Comics Database
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Green Book (film)
Gugusse and the Automaton
Gulliver's Travels Among the Lilliputians and the Giants
HMS Sword
Hamlet (1907 film)
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hannah and Her Sisters
Harcourt Williams
Harold Adamson
Harvest of Shame
Hear It Now
Hell Is Sold Out
Henry V (1944 film)
Her (film)
Hermione Gingold
High Noon
Honeymoon in a Balloon
How Bridget's Lover Escaped
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Howard Epstein
Howards End (film)
Hugo (film)
Humanity Through the Ages
Hypnotist's Revenge
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
In Search of the Castaways
In Which We Serve
In the Barber Shop
In the Heat of the Night (film)
In the Year 2889 (short story)
Incident from Don Quixote
India
International Broadcasting Bureau Greenville Transmitting Station
International Date Line
Invasion of the Sea
It Happened One Night
Jack Jaggs and Dum Dum
Jack Oakie
Jack and Jim (film)
Jacques Paganel
James Cagney
James Dime
James Poe
James W. Sullivan
Janet Huntington Brewster
Jean Passepartout
Jehanne d'Alcy
Joan of Arc (1900 film)
Joe E. Brown
John Carradine
John Farrow
John Gielgud
John Mills
John Wayne
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
José Greco
Journey Through the Impossible
Journey to the Center of the Earth
Jules Verne
Jules Verne bibliography
Julius Caesar (1953 film)
Jump cut
Jupiter's Thunderbolts
Kaiwo Maru (1930)
Ken Adam
Kevin McClory
Keye Luke
Keystone Kops
Killers of the Flower Moon (film)
King of the Mediums
Kirk Douglas
Knights of the Daffodil
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kéraban the Inflexible
Kéraban the Pigheaded
L.A. Confidential (film)
La La Land
Lady Bird (film)
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Le Grand Méliès
Leaving Las Vegas
Letters from Iwo Jima
Licorice Pizza
Lionel Lindon
Lisa Davis (actress)
List of American films of 1956
List of actuality films by Georges Méliès
List of reconstructed actualities by Georges Méliès
Logan's Run (film)
London After Dark
Long Distance Wireless Photography
Lord Glenarvan
Love Story (1970 film)
Love and Molasses
Luis Miguel Dominguín
MCA Records
Macbeth (1971 film)
Mad Max: Fury Road
Madison Square Garden
Madrid
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Marion Ross
Marla English
Marlene Dietrich
Martin Paz
Martine Carol
Marty (film)
Master Zacharius
Master of the World (novel)
Mathias Sandorf
McFarland & Company
Melville Cooper
Michael Anderson (director)
Michael Strogoff
Michel Verne
Midnight Cowboy
Midnight Express (film)
Mike Mazurki
Mike Todd
Miles White
Milk (2008 American film)
Millennium (film)
Million Dollar Baby
Misfortune Never Comes Alone
Mishaps of the New York–Paris Race
Miss de Vère (English Jig)
Mississippi Burning
Mistress Branican
Moitié de polka
Mona Lisa (play)
Monsieur Verdoux
Moonlight (2016 film)
Moulin Rouge!
Mr. Chimpanzee
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mr. Ray Sharp and Miss Me Flat
Mrs. Miniver
Mulholland Drive (film)
Mummers Parade
Murder by Phone
Murrow (film)
Murrow Boys
Murrow Turning Over in His Grave
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Left Foot
Mystic River (film)
Nagagutsu o Haita Neko: Sekai Isshū 80 Nichi Dai Bōken
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Award for Best Film
National Board of Review Awards 1956
Nautilus (fictional submarine)
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Screenplay
Night Must Fall (1937 film)
Night Was Our Friend
No Country for Old Men
Nomadland
None but the Lonely Heart (film)
Not Guilty (1908 film)
Noël Coward
Off on a Comet
Oklahoma! (1955 film)
Oliver! (film)
Olsen and Johnson
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Roofs
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Operation Crossbow (film)
Orca (1977 film)
Ordinary People
Orson Welles
Out of Africa (film)
Paisan
Paper mache
Parasite (2019 film)
Paris Exposition, 1900 (film series)
Paris in the Twentieth Century
Patton (film)
Paul Weatherwax
Person to Person
Perspecta
Peter Lorre
Pharmaceutical Hallucinations
Phileas Fogg
Philip Ahn
Photoplay
Pipe organ
Platoon (film)
Playing Cards (film)
Polyphemus
Pope Joan (1972 film)
Post No Bills (1896 film)
Pound sterling
Private Angelo (film)
Prizzi's Honor
Propeller Island
Pulp Fiction
Punch and Judy (film)
Pygmalion and Galatea (film)
Question 7
Quills (film)
Quiz Show (film)
Rain Man
Rebecca (1940 film)
Red Riding Hood (1901 film)
Red Skelton
Reds (film)
Reform Club
Reginald Denny (actor)
Retail Price Index
Rhesus monkey
Richard Wattis
Rip's Dream
Robbing Cleopatra's Tomb
Robert Cabal
Robert Macaire and Bertrand
Robert Morley
Robert Newton
Robinson Crusoe (1902 film)
Robur the Conqueror
Rocky
Rocky Mountain sheep
Rogues' Tricks
Roma (2018 film)
Ronald Adam (actor)
Ronald Colman
Ronald Squire
Ross Dowd
Rotten Tomatoes
Rugged Gold
Russian wolfhound
S.J. Perelman
S. J. Perelman
Satan in Prison
Satchmo the Great
Sati (practice)
Saul Bass
Saving Private Ryan
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Scotland Yard
Sea Fighting in Greece
Second Time Lucky
See It Now
Seein' Things (1908 film)
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Separate Vacations
Shake Hands with the Devil (1959 film)
Shakespeare Writing "Julius Caesar"
Shakespeare in Love
Shine (film)
Shirley MacLaine
Siamese cat
Sideshow Wrestlers
Sideways
Sightseeing Through Whisky
Sioux Nation
Slumdog Millionaire
Soap Bubbles (film)
Sons and Lovers (film)
South Pacific (1958 film)
Spartacus (film)
Spotlight (film)
Suez
Summer of the Monkeys (film)
Summoning the Spirits
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Suzanne Alexander
Sword of Gideon
Sylvia Lewis
Tchin-Chao, the Chinese Conjurer
Technicolor
Ten Hours Hunting
Ten Ladies in One Umbrella
Terms of Endearment
Texar's Revenge, or, North Against South
Thanking the Audience
The Accidental Tourist (film)
The Adoptive Son
The Adventures of Captain Hatteras
The Adventures of Three Englishmen and Three Russians in South Africa
The Apartment
The Apparition (1903 film)
The Archipelago on Fire
The Artist (film)
The Artist and the Mannikin
The Astronomer's Dream
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Ballet-Master's Dream
The Barber and the Farmer
The Barber of Seville (1904 film)
The Barsac Mission
The Begum's Fortune
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bewitched Inn
The Bewitched Trunk
The Black Imp
The Blockade Runners
The Brahmin and the Butterfly
The Bridegroom's Dilemma
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Broken Straws
The Broken Violin (1908 film)
The Cardinal
The Carpathian Castle
The Castaways of the Flag
The Catastrophe of the Balloon "Le Pax"
The Cave of the Demons
The Chase of the Golden Meteor
The Child of the Cavern
The Children of Captain Grant
The Chimney Sweep (film)
The Christmas Angel
The Christmas Dream
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Clockmaker's Dream
The Clown and Automobile
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Conquest of the Pole
The Conversation
The Cook's Revenge
The Cook in Trouble
The Coronation of Edward VII
The Count of Chanteleine
The Crystal Casket
The Dam Busters (film)
The Damnation of Faust (film)
The Danube Pilot
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Departed
The Descendants
The Devil in a Convent
The Diabolic Tenant
The Diabolical Church Window
The Doctor's Secret (1909 film)
The Doctor and the Monkey
The Drawing Lesson
The Dream of an Opium Fiend
The Dreyfus Affair (film series)
The Duke's Good Joke
The Eclipse, or the Courtship of the Sun and Moon
The Edward R. Murrow Forum on Issues in Journalism
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story
The Enchanted Sedan Chair
The Enchanted Well
The English Patient (film)
The Eruption of Mount Pelee
The Eternal Adam
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The Fairy Dragonfly
The Famous Box Trick
The Firefall
The Flight to France
The Ford 50th Anniversary Show
The Four Troublesome Heads
The French Connection (film)
The Frozen Policeman
The Fugitive Apparitions
The Fur Country
The Genii of Fire
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Golden Volcano
The Good Luck of a "Souse"
The Good Shepherdess and the Evil Princess
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Green Ray
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Haunted Castle (1896 film)
The Haunted Castle (1897 French film)
The Helping Hand (1908 French film)
The Hilarious Posters
The Hours (film)
The House of the Arrow (1953 film)
The Human Fly (1902 film)
The Human Pyramid (1899 film)
The Hurt Locker
The Imperceptible Transmutations
The Impossible Voyage
The Indian Sorcerer
The Infernal Cake Walk
The Infernal Cauldron
The Informer (1935 film)
The Inn Where No Man Rests
The Inn in the Ardennes
The Invention of Hugo Cabret
The Inventor Crazybrains and His Wonderful Airship
The Irishman
The Jeweller's Shop (film)
The King's Speech
The King and I (1956 film)
The Kingdom of the Fairies
The Kip Brothers
The Knight of Black Art
The Knight of the Snows
The Laboratory of Mephistopheles
The Last Cartridges
The Last Emperor
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lighthouse at the End of the World
The Lilliputian Minuet
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Living Doll
The Living Playing Cards
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Lottery Ticket
The Magic Lantern (film)
The Magician's Cavern
The Magician (1898 film)
The Man with the Rubber Head
The Martian Chronicles (miniseries)
The Marvellous Wreath
The Melomaniac
The Mermaid (1904 film)
The Merry Frolics of Satan
The Mighty Orinoco
The Miracles of the Brahmin
The Mischances of a Photographer
The Miser (1908 film)
The Misfortunes of an Explorer
The Monster (1903 film)
The Moon's a Balloon
The Mutineers of the Bounty
The Mysterious Box
The Mysterious Island
The Mysterious Island (1905 film)
The Mysterious Knight
The Mysterious Retort
The Mystical Flame
The Naked Edge
The New Adventures of Pinocchio (film)
The New Lord of the Village
The New York Times
The Nun's Story (film)
The Old Footlight Favorite
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The One-Man Band
The Oracle of Delphi (film)
The Other Log of Phileas Fogg
The Ox-Bow Incident
The Palace of the Arabian Nights
The Pillar of Fire
The Player (1992 film)
The Post (film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Prophetess of Thebes
The Providence of the Waves
The Purchase of the North Pole
The Queen's Musketeers
The Quiet Man
The Quiller Memorandum
The Rag-Picker
The Rajah's Dream
The Rescue on the River
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Robe (film)
The Sacred Fountain
The Scheming Gambler's Paradise
The School for Sons-in-law
The Sea Serpent
The Sea Wolf (1993 film)
The Secret of Wilhelm Storitz
The Shadow-Girl
The Shape of Water
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Snow Man (1899 film)
The Social Network
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sound of Music (film)
The Spider and the Butterfly
The Steam House
The Sting
The Surrender of Tournavos
The Survivors of the "Jonathan"
The Survivors of the Chancellor
The Temptation of Saint Anthony (film)
The Ten Commandments (1956 film)
The Terrible Turkish Executioner
The Thompson Travel Agency
The Three Stooges Go Around the World in a Daze
The Tower of London (1905 film)
The Tramp and the Mattress Makers
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Treasures of Satan
The Triple-Headed Lady
The True Glory
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Two Blind Men
The Untamable Whiskers
The Vanished Diamond
The Vanishing Lady
The Venetian Looking-Glass
The Village in the Treetops
The Voyage of the Bourrichon Family
The Waif of the Cynthia
The Will of an Eccentric
The Witch's Revenge
The Witch (1906 film)
The Woes of Roller Skaters
The Wonderful Living Fan
The Wonderful Rose-Tree
The Wreck of the Mary Deare (film)
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
This I Believe
Thomas Cook & Son
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Théâtre Robert-Houdin
Tim McCoy
Time (magazine)
Tit for Tat (1904 film)
Titanic (1997 film)
Title sequence
Todd-AO
Tom Ayrton
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tom Old Boot
Top Gun: Maverick
Topaze (1933 American film)
Topsy-Turvy
Traffic (2000 film)
Travel Scholarships
Travelogue (films)
Trevor Howard
Tribulation or the Misfortunes of a Cobbler
Tribulations of a Chinaman in China
Tunnelling the English Channel
Turner Classic Movies
Tweety's High-Flying Adventure
Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas
Two Years' Vacation
Tár
Under the Seas
Unexpected Fireworks
Unforgiven
United 93 (film)
United Artists
Up-to-Date Surgery
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Valet
Variety (magazine)
Victor McLaglen
Victor Young
Victorian burlesque
Voyages extraordinaires
Walter Fitzgerald
Warner Bros.
Watch on the Rhine
Waterfront (1950 film)
Watering the Flowers
West Side Story (1961 film)
What Is Home Without the Boarder
Whimsical Illusions
Why That Actor Was Late
Wild West
Wild and Wonderful
Will Any Gentleman...?
William Cameron Menzies
Wings (1927 film)
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written Comedy
Wuthering Heights (1939 film)
Yangtse Incident: The Story of H.M.S. Amethyst
Yesterday and Tomorrow
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Young Catherine
Z (1969 film)
Zero Dark Thirty
http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/ficheFilm/id/3532/year/1957.html
http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1001193-around_the_world_in_80_days/
http://www.in70mm.com/news/2002/80_days/index.htm
http://www.filmsite.org/voya.html
http://www.time.com/time/printout/0,8816,867209,00.html
http://manolo-eleremita.blogspot.com/2008/11/chinchn-plat-cinematogrfico.html
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,937582,00.html
http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=80days56.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20070117090347/http://www.filmsite.org/voya.html
http://comicbookdb.com/issue.php?ID=313504
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=950DEFDD123EE23BBC4052DFB667838D649EDE
https://www.comics.org/issue/13670
http://www.awn.com/news/yellow-submarine-animation-director-robert-balser-passes-88
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v2884
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048960/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048960/awards
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt3005242/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/51739
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1001193-around_the_world_in_80_days
https://www.thedailystar.net/in-focus/news/when-hollywood-came-calling-1656130
https://books.google.com/books?id=TOEDAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA65
http://www.archive.org/stream/variety212-1958-10#page/n78/mode/1up
http://www.archive.org/stream/variety212-1958-11#page/n88/mode/1up
https://books.google.com/books?id=10dXAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA75
https://web.archive.org/web/2018010101/http://comicbookdb.com/issue.php?ID=313504
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX3818212
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb17786810z
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb17786810z
https://viaf.org/viaf/999148705738037080007
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q696057#identifiers
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1981&dat=19581125&id=p9oqAAAAIBAJ&pg=3710,3787793
https://web.archive.org/web/20120210192304/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/2884/Around-the-World-in-80-Days/awards
https://archive.today/20130105020635/http://www.time.com/time/printout/0,8816,867209,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080408005657/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,937582,00.html
https://archive.org/details/variety209-1958-01/page/n10/mode/1up?view=theater
https://measuringworth.com/datasets/ukearncpi/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/67646/enwp
https://musicbrainz.org/work/6a3382f2-a2fa-4530-9031-839b772d0c11
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no98051324
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q696057#P345
