Arrowsmith (film)
Arrowsmith is a 1931 American pre-Code drama film directed by John Ford and starring Ronald Colman, Helen Hayes, Richard Bennett, and Myrna Loy. It was adapted from Sinclair Lewis's 1925 novel Arrowsmith by Sidney Howard, departing substantially from the book regarding Arrowsmith's womanizing and other key plot elements. The pre-Code film received four Oscar nominations, including the Academy Award for Best Picture, Best Writing, Adaptation (Howard), Best Cinematography (Ray June), and Best Art Direction (Richard Day).


== Plot ==
An idealistic young medical student, Martin Arrowsmith, introduces himself assertively to Dr. Max Gottlieb, a noted bacteriologist. Though Gottlieb deems Arrowsmith not yet ready to study with him, he is impressed by the young man's determination and honest self-appraisal, and encourages him to take the standard course of study first. When Arrowsmith graduates, Gottlieb offers him a position as his research assistant, but the young man reluctantly turns him down, having fallen in love with a nurse, Leora. He would be unable to support her on a research assistant's meager salary. He marries, and the couple sets off for Leora's rural home town in South Dakota.
Unhappy with the vicissitudes of his medical practice there, he is drawn by a former client across the boundary into veterinary medicine when the man's cows are dying - even faster when given injections by the local state health official.  Determined to find a cure of his own, he carries out scientific research in his kitchen, eventually developing a successful serum. Reinvigorated, he decides to abandon his practice and join Gottlieb as a research scientist at the renowned and extremely well-funded McGurk Institute in New York. Meanwhile, Leora miscarries and cannot have any more children, so she devotes herself to her husband's career.
After two fallow years at McGurk, Arrowsmith stumbles onto an antibiotic serum that he does not understand (and is unsure how he produced), yet has demonstrated the ability to kill at least one type of germ.  He shortly is able to replicate it, and in order to study its efficacy on other microbes is sent to the West Indies, where a virulent outbreak of bubonic plague has arisen.  He is coincidentally teamed with a popular Swedish lecturer on "Heroes of Health" he once met while still in South Dakota, Dr. Gustav Sondelius, who is extremely enthusiastic over both the team and the serum's prospects to help cure the disease. Leora accompanies her husband, despite his fear for her safety. 

Arrowsmith has strict instructions from Gottlieb to employ the scientific method in his efforts, conducting a blind study by administering the serum to one-half his patients and a placebo injection to the other.  Upon learning of this, the West Indies governor, Sir Robert Fairland, refuses to allow him to proceed.  Seeking to break the impasse, black Dr. Oliver Marchand suggests Arrowsmith conduct his experiment in a backwater community on a neighboring island where the infection is rampant. Arrowsmith agrees, insisting Leona stay behind for her own protection.  The study begins.  Among those seeking an inoculation of Arrowsmith's serum is Mrs. Joyce Lanyon, a New York socialite stranded on the island. They are attracted to each other, though their subsequent affair is only hinted at obliquely.
Sondelius contracts the disease.  In his death throes, he pleads with Arrowsmith to abandon scientific protocol and save as many lives as possible. Concerned about his wife's welfare, Arrowsmith asks Marchand to check on her upon his return to the main island, only to have his colleague die while on the phone before he can give his report.  Arrowsmith races home, but Leora is dead. In a drunken delirium, he gives the serum to all, saving the Indies from the plague. Upon his return to New York, he is hailed by the press and feted by McGurk Institute head Dr. Tubbs, who seeks to take advantage of Arrowsmith's glory. Arrowsmith instead rushes directly to Gottlieb.
Desperate to explain his abandonment of research principles and his mentor's specific mandate to advance science rather than practice medicine, Arrowsmith discovers that Gottlieb has had a stroke, is insensible, and near death.  Disgusted with all that is transpiring, friend and colleague Terry Wickett, a prominent chemist at the Institute, announces abruptly that he is quitting to set up his own "shoestring" laboratory to pursue science.  Turning his back on public adulation, a promotion, and a big raise, Arrowsmith resigns to join forces with Wickett. Joyce Lanyon appears, seeking to rekindle their relationship, but he spurns her, committing himself to his career.


== Cast ==
Ronald Colman as Dr Martin Arrowsmith
Helen Hayes as Leora Arrowsmith
Richard Bennett as Gustav Sondelius
A.E. Anson as Professor Max Gottlieb
Clarence Brooks as Oliver Marchand
Alec B. Francis as Twyford
Claude King as Dr. Tubbs
Bert Roach as Bert Tozer
Myrna Loy as Mrs Joyce Lanyon
Russell Hopton as Terry Wickett
David Landau as State Veterinarian
Lumsden Hare as Sir Robert Fairland – Governor
Ward Bond as Cop (uncredited)
John Qualen as Henry Novak (uncredited)


== Production ==
The film is only somewhat faithful to the novel, among other significant changes omitting Arrowsmith's serial womanizing, and completely skipping all mention of Arrowsmith's wealthy, self-centered second wife. Myrna Loy has only a few scenes with Colman, and their relationship is undeveloped to the point of being indecipherable. According to Robert Osborne, host of Turner Classic Movies, Helen Hayes claimed that as filming went on various scenes were dropped from the script without explanation. It is claimed that Samuel Goldwyn had hired director John Ford on condition that he not drink during the production.


== Reception ==
The film was a financial and critical success. It was nominated for four Academy Awards, including for Best Picture, Best Writing, Adaptation (Howard), Best Art Direction (Richard Day) and Best Cinematography (Ray June).


== References ==


== External links ==
Arrowsmith at IMDb 
Arrowsmith at Rotten Tomatoes
Tom Paulus, "The View Across the Courtyard: Bazin and the Evolution of Depth Style" in the Andre Bazin special issue, Jeffrey Crouse (ed.), Film International, Issue 30, Vol. 5, No. 6, 2007, pp. 62–73.3 Bad Men
3 Godfathers (1948 film)
7 Women
A.E. Anson
A Fight for Love
A Gun Fightin' Gentleman
A Marked Man
A Song Is Born
A Thief in Paradise
A Woman's Fool
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Awards
Ace of the Saddle
Action (1921 film)
Air Mail (film)
Alec B. Francis
Alfred Newman (composer)
All Movie Guide
Arrowsmith (book)
Ball of Fire
Barbary Coast (film)
Bare Fists
Baseline (database)
Beloved Enemy
Bert Roach
Best Adapted Screenplay
Best Art Direction
Best Cinematography
Blind study
Born Reckless (1930 film)
Bubonic plague
Bucking Broadway
Bulldog Drummond (1929 film)
By Indian Post
Cameo Kirby (1923 film)
Chesty: A Tribute to a Legend
Cheyenne's Pal
Cheyenne Autumn
Clarence Brooks (actor)
Claude King (English actor)
Come and Get It (1936 film)
Condemned (1929 film)
Cynara (1932 film)
Cytherea (film)
David Landau (actor)
Dead End (1937 film)
December 7th (film)
Desperate Trails (1921 film)
Directed by John Ford
Doctor Bull
Dodsworth (film)
Donovan's Reef
Drama (film and television)
Drums Along the Mohawk
Edge of Doom
Enchantment (1948 film)
Five Came Back (TV series)
Flashing Spikes
Flesh (1932 film)
Fort Apache (film)
Four Men and a Prayer
Four Sons
Gideon's Day (film)
Gun Law (1919 film)
Guys and Dolls (film)
Hangman's House
Hans Christian Andersen (film)
Hearts of Oak (film)
Helen Hayes
Hell Bent (film)
His Supreme Moment
Hitchin' Posts
Hoodman Blind
How Green Was My Valley (film)
How the West Was Won (film)
IMDb (identifier)
I Want You (1951 film)
In Hollywood with Potash and Perlmutter
Jackie (1921 film)
John Ford
John Ford filmography
John Qualen
Judge Priest
Just Pals
Kentucky Pride
Kid Millions
Korea: Battleground for Liberty
Lightnin' (1925 film)
Little Miss Smiles
Lumsden Hare
Marked Men (1919 film)
Mary of Scotland (film)
Men Without Women (film)
Mister Roberts (1955 film)
Mogambo
Mother Machree
My Darling Clementine
My Foolish Heart (1949 film)
Myrna Loy
Nana (1934 film)
North of Hudson Bay
One Heavenly Night
Our Very Own (1950 film)
Palmy Days
Partners Again
Pilgrimage (1933 film)
Porgy and Bess (film)
Potash and Perlmutter
Pre-Code
Pre-Code Hollywood
Raffles (1930 film)
Ray June
Richard Bennett (actor)
Richard Day (writer)
Rider of the Law
Riders of Vengeance
Riley the Cop
Rio Grande (1950 film)
Robert Osborne
Roman Scandals
Ronald Colman
Rookie of the Year (Screen Directors Playhouse)
Roped
Roseanna McCoy
Rotten Tomatoes
Russell Hopton
Rustlers (1919 film)
Salute (1929 film)
Samuel Goldwyn
Samuel Goldwyn Productions
Scientific method
Seas Beneath
Sergeant Rutledge
Sex Hygiene
She Wore a Yellow Ribbon
Sidney Howard
Silver Wings (film)
Sinclair Lewis
Slave of Desire
Splendor (1935 film)
Stagecoach (1939 film)
Steamboat Round the Bend
Stella Dallas (1925 film)
Stella Dallas (1937 film)
Straight Shooting
Street Scene (film)
Strike Me Pink (1936 film)
Strong Boy
Submarine Patrol
Sure Fire
Thank You (1925 film)
The Adventures of Marco Polo
The Awakening (1928 film)
The Battle of Midway (film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Big Punch
The Bishop's Wife
The Black Watch (film)
The Blue Eagle
The Brat
The Colter Craven Story
The Cowboy and the Lady (1938 film)
The Craving (1918 film)
The Dark Angel (1925 film)
The Dark Angel (1935 film)
The Devil Dancer
The Devil to Pay! (film)
The Eternal City (1923 film)
The Face on the Bar-Room Floor (1923 film)
The Fighting Brothers
The Fighting Heart (1925 film)
The Film Daily
The Freeze-Out
The Fugitive (1947 film)
The Girl in Number 29
The Goldwyn Follies
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Greeks Had a Word for Them
The Gun Packer
The Horse Soldiers
The Hurricane (1937 film)
The Informer (1935 film)
The Iron Horse (film)
The Kid from Brooklyn
The Kid from Spain
The Last Hurrah (1958 film)
The Last Outlaw (1919 film)
The Little Foxes (film)
The Long Gray Line
The Long Voyage Home
The Lost Patrol (1934 film)
The Magic Flame
The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance
The Masquerader (1933 film)
The New York Times
The Night of Love (1927 film)
The North Star (1943 film)
The Outcasts of Poker Flat (1919 film)
The Pest (1919 film)
The Phantom Riders
The Plough and the Stars (film)
The Pride of the Yankees
The Prince of Avenue A
The Princess and the Pirate
The Prisoner of Shark Island
The Quiet Man
The Real Glory
The Rescue (1929 film)
The Rising of the Moon (film)
The Scarlet Drop
The Scrapper
The Searchers
The Secret Life of Walter Mitty (1947 film)
The Secret Man
The Shamrock Handicap
The Soul Herder
The Sun Shines Bright
The Tornado (1917 film)
The Trail of Hate (1917 film)
The Unholy Garden
The Village Blacksmith (1922 film)
The Wallop
The Wedding Night
The Westerner (1940 film)
The Whole Town's Talking
The Wings of Eagles
The Winning of Barbara Worth
The World Moves On
These Three
They Got Me Covered
They Shall Have Music
They Were Expendable
Thieves' Gold
This Is Heaven
This Is Korea
Three Jumps Ahead
Three Mounted Men
Tobacco Road (film)
Tonight or Never (1931 film)
Torpedo Squadron
Turner Classic Movies
Two Lovers (1928 film)
Two Rode Together
Undercover (OSS training film)
United Artists
Up in Arms
Up the River
Upstream (film)
Vietnam! Vietnam!
Wagon Master
Ward Bond
We Live Again
Wee Willie Winkie (film)
West Indies
What Price Glory (1952 film)
When Willie Comes Marching Home
Whoopee! (film)
Wild Women (1918 film)
Woman Chases Man
Wonder Man (film)
Wuthering Heights (1939 film)
Young Cassidy
Young Mr. Lincoln
https://archive.org/stream/international193738quig#page/942/mode/2up/search/%22box+office%22
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/2903/Arrowsmith/details
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0021622/
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1933
https://web.archive.org/web/20121017091114/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/2903/Arrowsmith/details
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/arrowsmith
https://www.classicmoviehub.com/film/arrowsmith-1931/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q703011#P345
