Becket (1964 film)
Becket is a 1964 British historical drama film about the historic, tumultuous relationship between Henry II of England and his friend-turned-bishop Thomas Becket. It is a dramatic film adaptation of the 1959 play Becket or the Honour of God by Jean Anouilh made by Hal Wallis Productions and released by Paramount Pictures. It was directed by Peter Glenville and produced by Hal B. Wallis with Joseph H. Hazen as executive producer. The screenplay was written by Edward Anhalt based on Anouilh's play. The music score was by Laurence Rosenthal, the cinematography by Geoffrey Unsworth and the editing by Anne V. Coates.
The film stars Richard Burton as Thomas Becket and Peter O'Toole as King Henry II, with John Gielgud as King Louis VII, Donald Wolfit as Gilbert Foliot, Paolo Stoppa as Pope Alexander III, Martita Hunt as Empress Matilda, Pamela Brown as Queen Eleanor, Siân Phillips, Felix Aylmer, Gino Cervi, David Weston and Wilfrid Lawson.
Restored prints of Becket were re-released in 30 cinemas in the US in early 2007, following an extensive restoration from the film's YCM separation protection masters. The film was released on DVD by MPI Home Video in May 2007 and on Blu-ray Disc in November 2008. The new film prints carry a Dolby Digital soundtrack, although the soundtrack of the original film, which originally opened as a roadshow theatrical release, was also in stereo.
Becket won the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, and was nominated for eleven other awards, including for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor, and twice for Best Actor.


== Background and production ==
The original French play on which the film is based was given its first performance in Paris in 1959. It opened on Broadway with Laurence Olivier as Becket and Anthony Quinn as King Henry II in a production directed by Peter Glenville, who later went on to direct the film version. The play opened in London in a production by Peter Hall with Eric Porter and Christopher Plummer. O'Toole was originally signed to play Henry II in the production, but broke the contract before rehearsals began to take the lead in David Lean's film of Lawrence of Arabia.The film was made at Shepperton Studios, England, and on location at Alnwick Castle, Bamburgh Castle and Bamburgh Beach in Northumberland.Peter O'Toole went on to play King Henry II once more in The Lion in Winter (1968) with Katharine Hepburn as Queen Eleanor.
Siân Phillips, who plays Gwendolen, was Peter O'Toole's wife at the time of filming.


== Synopsis ==
During the late 12th century, about 100 years after the Norman conquest of England (1066), the Normans have removed the native ruling class, replacing it with a new monarchy, aristocracy and clerical hierarchy.
Thomas Becket is a Saxon courtier to King Henry II, who becomes a determined opponent of the King as the Archbishop of Canterbury.


== Plot ==
Thomas Becket is a advisor and companion of the carousing King Henry II. Henry appoints Becket as Lord Chancellor to have a close confidant in this position whom he can completely control. Henry is more interested in escaping his royal duties through drunken forays in the royal hunting grounds, and womanising among peasant women. He becomes increasingly dependent on Becket, a Saxon commoner, who arranges these debaucheries when he is not busy running Henry's court. This foments great resentment on the part of Henry's Norman noblemen, who distrust and envy this Saxon upstart, as well as Henry's wife Queen Eleanor and Henry's mother Empress Matilda, who see Becket as an unnatural and unseemly influence upon the King.
Henry finds himself in continuous conflict with the elderly Archbishop of Canterbury, who opposes the taxation of Church property to support Henry's military campaigns in France. During one of his campaigns in coastal France, he receives news that the archbishop has died. In a burst of inspiration, Henry exercises his prerogative to pick the next Archbishop, and informs an astonished Becket that he is the royal choice.
Shortly thereafter, Becket sides with the Church, throwing Henry into a fury. One of the main bones of contention is Thomas' excommunication of Lord Gilbert, one of Henry's most loyal stalwarts, for seizing and ordering the killing of a priest who had been accused of sexual indiscretions with a young girl, before the priest can even be handed over for ecclesiastical trial. Gilbert then refused to acknowledge his transgressions and seek absolution.
The King has a dramatic secret meeting with the Bishop of London in his cathedral. He lays out his plan to remove Becket through scandal and innuendo, which the envious Bishop of London quickly agrees to. These attempts fall flat when Becket, in full ecclesiastic garb, confronts his accusers and announces that as Archbishop he will petition the Pope for a ecclesiastical trial, causing Henry to laugh and bitterly note the irony of having his friend turn into his enemy. 
Becket escapes to France where he encounters the conniving yet sympathetic King Louis. King Louis sees in Becket a means by which he can further his favourite pastime, tormenting the English. Louis provides refuge for Becket at the Abbey of Saint Martin while the English send emissaries to retrieve Becket.
Becket then travels to the Vatican, where he begs the Pope to allow him to renounce his position and retire to a monastery as an ordinary priest. The Pope reminds Becket that he has an obligation as a matter of principle to return to England and take a stand against civil interference in Church matters. Becket yields to this decision and asks Louis to arrange a meeting with Henry on the beaches at Normandy. Henry asks Becket whether or not he loved him and Becket replied that he loved Henry to the best of his ability. A shaky truce is declared and Becket is allowed to return to England.
Henry then rapidly sinks into drunken fixation over Becket and his perceived betrayal. The barons worsen his mood by pointing out that Becket has become a folk hero among the vanquished Saxons, who are ever restive and resentful of their Norman conquerors. During a drunken rage, Henry asks "Will no one rid me of this meddlesome priest?" His faithful barons hear this and proceed quickly to Canterbury, where they put Thomas and his Saxon deputy, Brother John, to the sword. A badly shaken Henry then undergoes a penance by whipping at the hands of Saxon monks.
Henry, fresh from his whipping, informs the barons that the ones who killed Becket will be found and justly punished. He then publicly proclaims to the crowd outside the church his arrangement for Thomas Becket to be canonised as a saint.


== Preservation ==
The Academy Film Archive preserved Becket in 2003.


== Cast ==
Richard Burton – Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury
Peter O'Toole – King Henry II of England
John Gielgud – King Louis VII of France
Paolo Stoppa (voice: Robert Rietti) – Pope Alexander III
Donald Wolfit – Gilbert Foliot, Bishop of London
David Weston – Brother John
Martita Hunt – Empress Matilda, Henry II's mother
Pamela Brown – Eleanor of Aquitaine, wife of Henry II
Siân Phillips – Gwendolen - Becket's lover & a Welsh noblewoman who is a captive of Henry II
Felix Aylmer – Theobald of Bec, Archbishop of Canterbury
Gino Cervi – Cardinal Zambelli
Percy Herbert – Baron
Niall MacGinnis – Baron
Christopher Rhodes – Baron
Peter Jeffrey – Baron
Inigo Jackson – Robert de Beaumont
John Phillips – Bishop of Winchester
Frank Pettingell – Bishop of York
Hamilton Dyce – Bishop of Chichester
Jennifer Hilary – Peasant's daughter
Véronique Vendell – Marie, a French peasant girl that Henry has a tryst with
Graham Stark – The Pope's Secretary
Jack Taylor – a villager
Victor Spinetti – French tailor
Edward Woodward – Clement


== Historicity ==
Most of the historical inaccuracies in the film are from the play, as Anouilh was writing drama rather than a history, and he took dramatic licence.
The major inaccuracy is the depiction of Becket as a Saxon who has risen to a perceived Norman social standing, when in fact the historical Thomas Becket was a Norman (while Henry was an Angevin). Anouilh did this because he had based the play on a 19th-century account that described Becket as a Saxon. He had been informed of this error before his play was produced, but decided against correcting it because it would undermine a key point of conflict, and because "history might eventually rediscover that Becket was a Saxon, after all."
Becket is depicted as Henry's loyal "drinking pal", who assists him with illicit romantic entanglements and drunken hunting exercises, but who becomes saintly and responsible after his appointment as Archbishop. Passing mention is made in the film of the Constitutions of Clarendon (simply as the "Sixteen Articles"); the struggle between Becket and Henry is boiled down to their conflict over Lord Gilbert's murder of the captive priest. In no way is Becket depicted as a man who desired special legal privileges (defrocking rather than prison) for his clergy, as some believe.
Henry's mother, Empress Matilda, died in 1167, three years before the treaty of Fréteval allowed Becket to return in England. Henry appears to not have any respect for his mother and treats her as something of an annoyance, a rather drastic departure from what is generally held as historical fact. Empress Matilda was Henry's sole parent for much of his childhood, and she was instrumental in shaping Henry into the fierce warrior and skilled administrator he was. Far from seeing his mother as a burden, Henry seems to have adored Matilda and relied heavily on her advice and guidance until her death.
Henry's wife, Eleanor of Aquitaine, was in fact beautiful, and highly educated. She was known to have a amicable marriage with Henry despite his mistresses and frequent absences. She is shown publicly rebuking Henry in a scene near the end of the film, when in fact Eleanor, whatever private reservations she may have had, is not known to have ever behaved in such a manner in public. During the same scene, she says she will go to her father to complain of Henry's treatment of her; however, her father William X, Duke of Aquitaine had died decades before, when Eleanor was just 15 years old. 
Also, the film only shows four sons of Henry and Eleanor. In actuality, Henry and Eleanor had eight children, five sons and three daughters. While the eldest son, William, had died before the events of the film, the three daughters are neglected.


== Production financing ==
The film grossed $9,164,370 at the box office, earning $3 million in rentals.


== Reception ==
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, 75% of 28 critics gave the film a positive review, with an average rating of 7.2/10.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Legacy ==
Becket and its spiritual sequel The Lion in Winter were both nominated for Best Picture in their respective years 1964 and 1968. Both lost in years which were considered by many to be Musical Film showdowns, where two high-profile musical films were in contention to win Best Picture: Mary Poppins and winner My Fair Lady against Becket in 1964, Funny Girl and winner Oliver! against The Lion in Winter in 1968.


== See also ==
List of American films of 1964
List of historical drama films


== References ==


== External links ==

Becket at IMDb
Becket at Rotten Tomatoes
Becket at the TCM Movie Database
Becket re-release official website Archived 3 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine12 Years a Slave (film)
17th Directors Guild of America Awards
17th Writers Guild of America Awards
18th British Academy Film Awards
1917 (2019 film)
1964 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
22nd Golden Globe Awards
37th Academy Awards
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Most Violent Year
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Film Archive
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Alnwick Castle
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Cinema Editors
American Cinema Editors Award for Best Edited Feature Film – Dramatic
Angevin kings of England
Anglo-Saxons
Anne V. Coates
Anne of the Thousand Days
Anthony Quinn
Archbishop of Canterbury
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Atonement (2007 film)
Avatar (2009 film)
BAFTA
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role
BAFTA Award for Best British Screenplay
BAFTA Award for Best Cinematography
BAFTA Award for Best Costume Design
BAFTA Award for Best Film
BAFTA Award for Best Production Design
BAFTA Award for Outstanding British Film
Babel (film)
Bamburgh Castle
Barry Lyndon
Becket
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Betrayal (1983 film)
Bicycle Thieves
Bishop of Chichester
Bishop of London
Bishop of Winchester
Bishop of York
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Boyhood (2014 film)
British Society of Cinematographers
Brokeback Mountain
Bugsy
Cabaret (1972 film)
Canonization
Canterbury
Chariots of Fire
Chinatown (1974 film)
Christopher Plummer
Christopher Rhodes
Citizen Kane
Confessions of a Nazi Spy
Constitutions of Clarendon
Círculo de Escritores Cinematográficos
Da 5 Bloods
Dances with Wolves
David Lean
David Weston (actor)
Days of Heaven
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Directors Guild of America Awards
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dolby Digital
Donald Wolfit
Driving Miss Daisy
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
East of Eden (film)
Edward Anhalt
Edward Woodward
Eleanor of Aquitaine
Empire of the Sun (film)
Empress Matilda
Eric Porter
Excommunication
Fandango Media
Far from the Madding Crowd (1967 film)
Felix Aylmer
Film adaptation
Finding Neverland (film)
Forrest Gump
Fotogramas de Plata
Frank Pettingell
Funny Girl (film)
Gandhi (film)
Gentleman's Agreement
Geoffrey Unsworth
Gilbert Foliot
Gino Cervi
Gladiator (2000 film)
Gods and Monsters (film)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score
Good Night, and Good Luck
Graham Stark
Green Book (film)
HFPA
Hal B. Wallis
Hamilton Dyce
Henry II of England
Henry V (1944 film)
Her (film)
Historical drama
Holy See
Hotel Paradiso (film)
Howards End (film)
Hugo (film)
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
In Which We Serve
In the Heat of the Night (film)
Inigo Jackson
It Happened One Night
Jean Anouilh
Jennifer Hilary
John Bryan (art director)
John Cox (sound engineer)
John Gielgud
John Phillips (actor)
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Julius Caesar (1953 film)
Katharine Hepburn
Kramer vs. Kramer
L.A. Confidential (film)
Laurel Awards
Laurence Olivier
Laurence Rosenthal
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Letters from Iwo Jima
Licorice Pizza
List of American films of 1964
List of historical drama films
Lord Chancellor
Louis VII of France
Love Story (1970 film)
MPI Home Video
Macbeth (1971 film)
Mad Max: Fury Road
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Margaret Furse
Martita Hunt
Marty (film)
Mary Poppins (film)
Maurice Carter (film designer)
Me and the Colonel
Midnight Express (film)
Mississippi Burning
Monsieur Verdoux
Moonlight (2016 film)
Moulin Rouge!
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Musical Film
My Fair Lady (film)
Mystic River (film)
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Award for Best Film
National Board of Review Awards 1964
New York Film Critics Circle
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Screenplay
Niall MacGinnis
Night Must Fall (1937 film)
No Country for Old Men
Nomadland
None but the Lonely Heart (film)
Norman conquest of England
Normans
Northumberland
Oliver! (film)
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Ordinary People
Out of Africa (film)
Paisan
Pamela Brown (actress)
Paolo Stoppa
Paramount Pictures
Paris
Patrick McLoughlin (set decorator)
Patton (film)
Percy Herbert (actor)
Peter Glenville
Peter Hall (theatre director)
Peter Jeffrey
Peter O'Toole
Platoon (film)
Pope Alexander III
Pulp Fiction
Question 7
Quills (film)
Rain Man
Reds (film)
Richard Burton
Roadshow theatrical release
Robert Cartwright
Robert Rietti
Rocky
Rotten Tomatoes
Sant Jordi Awards
Saving Private Ryan
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Shepperton Studios
Shine (film)
Siân Phillips
Slumdog Millionaire
Sons and Lovers (film)
Spartacus (film)
Summer and Smoke (film)
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Term of Trial
Terms of Endearment
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Cardinal
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Comedians (1967 film)
The Conversation
The Defiant Ones
The Descendants
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story
The English Patient (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The French Connection (film)
The Godfather
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Hours (film)
The Informer (1935 film)
The Irishman
The Last Emperor
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The New York Times
The Nun's Story (film)
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Ox-Bow Incident
The Post (film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Prisoner (1955 film)
The Quiet Man
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Robe (film)
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Social Network
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sting
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The True Glory
The Turning Point (1977 film)
Theobald of Bec
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
Thomas Becket
Three-strip Technicolor
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Titanic (1997 film)
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Top Gun: Maverick
Topaze (1933 American film)
Turner Classic Movies
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Variety (magazine)
Variety Film Reviews
Victor Spinetti
Véronique Vendell
Wayback Machine
Wilfrid Lawson (actor)
Will no one rid me of this meddlesome priest?
William X, Duke of Aquitaine
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written Drama
Zero Dark Thirty
http://www.becketthemovie.com/
http://www.the-numbers.com/movies/1964/0BCKT.php
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1965
http://www.oscars.org/academy-film-archive/preserved-projects?title=Becket&filmmaker=&category=All&collection=All
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/4550/Becket/awards
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0057877/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0057877/dvd
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/becket
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/68316/enwp
https://web.archive.org/web/20121018163635/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/4550/Becket/awards
https://old.post-gazette.com/pg/07075/769823-120.stm
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/01/reel-history-becket
https://web.archive.org/web/20150402003759/http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1965
http://awards.bafta.org/award/1965/film
https://bscine.com/media/uploads/awards/bsc-cinematography-feature-film.pdf?v
https://www.dga.org/Awards/History/1960s/1964.aspx?value=1964
https://www.goldenglobes.com/film/becket
https://nationalboardofreview.org/award-years/1964/
https://www.nyfcc.com/awards/?awardyear=1964
https://archive.today/20121205095022/http://www.wga.org/awards/awardssub.aspx?id=1551
http://www.wga.org/awards/awardssub.aspx?id=1551
https://variety.com/1963/film/reviews/becket-1200420680/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210303203353/http://www.becketthemovie.com/
