Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Ben-Hur is a 1959 American religious epic film directed by William Wyler, produced by Sam Zimbalist, and starring Charlton Heston as the title character. A remake of the 1925 silent film with a similar title, it was adapted from Lew Wallace's 1880 novel Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ. The screenplay is credited to Karl Tunberg, but includes contributions from Maxwell Anderson, S. N. Behrman, Gore Vidal, and Christopher Fry. The cast also features Stephen Boyd, Jack Hawkins, Haya Harareet, Hugh Griffith, Martha Scott, Cathy O'Donnell and Sam Jaffe.
Ben-Hur had the largest budget ($15.175 million), as well as the largest sets built, of any film produced at the time. Costume designer Elizabeth Haffenden oversaw a staff of 100 wardrobe fabricators to make the costumes, and a workshop employing 200 artists and workmen provided the hundreds of friezes and statues needed in the film. Filming commenced on May 18, 1958, and wrapped on January 7, 1959, with shooting lasting for 12 to 14 hours a day and six days a week. Pre-production began in Italy at Cinecittà around October 1957, and post-production took six months. Under cinematographer Robert L. Surtees, executives at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer made the decision to produce the film in a widescreen format. Over 200 camels and 2,500 horses were used in the shooting of the film, with some 10,000 extras. The sea battle was filmed using miniatures in a huge tank on the back lot at the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios in Culver City, California. The nine-minute chariot race has become one of cinema's most famous action sequences, and the score, composed and conducted by Miklós Rózsa, was at the time the longest ever composed for a film, and was highly influential on cinema for over 15 years.
Following a $14.7 million marketing effort, Ben-Hur premiered at Loew's State Theatre in New York City on November 18, 1959. It was the fastest-grossing as well as the highest-grossing film of 1959, becoming the second highest-grossing film in history at the time, after Gone with the Wind. It won a record eleven Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director (Wyler), Best Actor in a Leading Role (Heston), Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Griffith), and Best Cinematography – Color (Surtees); it also won Golden Globe Awards for Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, and Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture for Stephen Boyd. In 1998, the American Film Institute named it the 72nd best American film and the second best American epic film in the AFI's 10 Top 10. In 2004, the National Film Preservation Board selected Ben-Hur for preservation by the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".


== Plot ==
A baby is born in Bethlehem among the shepherds and visited by Magi in a cave.
In A.D. 26 Jerusalem, Judah Ben-Hur, a wealthy Jewish prince and merchant, lives with his mother, Miriam, and younger sister, Tirzah. The family's steward, Simonides, has a daughter named Esther. Judah grants Simonides' request for Esther to marry a freeman and gives Esther her freedom as a wedding gift. Apart since childhood, Judah and Esther quickly fall in love.
Judah's Roman boyhood friend, Messala, returns to Jerusalem as commander of the Fortress Antonia. He fully embraces Rome's glory and imperial power while Judah remains devoted to his faith and the Jewish people's freedom. When Messala demands that Judah surrender potential rebels to Roman authorities, Judah refuses. He tells his family they will never see Messala again.
The new Judean governor and his procession enter the city. As Judah and Tirzah watch from the upper terrace, loose roof tiles fall, spooking the governor's horse and throwing him off. Messala realizes it was accidental but condemns Judah to the galleys and imprisons Miriam and Tirzah. When Simonides attempts to intervene, Messala arrests him as well. Judah vows revenge upon Messala. As he and other slaves are marched to the galleys, they stop in Nazareth. Denied water, Judah collapses but is revived when a local man gives him a drink and faces down the Roman guard.
After three years as a galley slave, Judah is assigned to Roman Consul Quintus Arrius' flagship. Arrius notices Judah's determination and self-discipline and offers to train him as a gladiator or charioteer, which Judah refuses. When the Roman fleet is attacked by Macedonian pirates, Arrius orders Judah to be unchained. The ship's hull is rammed, flooding the galley. Judah frees the other rowers, then rescues Arrius, who was thrown overboard. Clinging to wreckage and believing his fleet lost, Arrius attempts suicide, but Judah stops him. After being rescued, Arrius learns the battle was won. He later petitions Emperor Tiberius to free Judah, and adopts him as his son. During his time in Rome, Judah becomes a champion charioteer.
While returning to Judea, Judah meets Balthasar and Arab Sheik Ilderim. Seeing Judah's prowess as a charioteer, the sheik asks him to drive his four horses in a race before the new Judean governor, Pontius Pilate. Judah declines, despite knowing that Messala is competing. Balthasar tells Judah about a prophet he seeks who preaches love and forgiveness, and urges Judah to cast off his consuming hate and vengeance.
In Jerusalem, Judah returns to his abandoned house and finds Esther, who never married, living with her debilitated father and also Malluch, a mute former prisoner. Messala imprisoned and tortured Simonides, who has protected Judah's fortune nonetheless. Presenting himself as Quintus Arrius' son, Judah confronts Messala and demands to know Miriam and Tirzah's fates. Messala orders their release from prison. Both have contracted leprosy and are secretly expelled from the city. Before traveling to the Valley of the Lepers, the women find Esther and beg her to conceal their condition from Judah. To stop him searching, Esther tells Judah they are dead.
Seeking revenge, Judah agrees to drive Sheik Ilderim's horses against Messala in the chariot race. The sheik goads Messala into making an enormous wager on himself before revealing Judah is his driver. During the race, Messala drives a chariot with steel blades on its sides to disable competitors. He attempts to destroy Judah's chariot, but wrecks his own instead. Dragged behind his horses, he is trampled by another chariot, while Judah wins the race. Before dying, Messala tells Judah his mother and sister are alive in the Valley of the Lepers.
Judah goes to the leper colony and encounters Esther and Malluch bringing supplies to Miriam and Tirzah. Esther persuades him to conceal himself as his family would wish. Judah and Esther then follow a crowd to hear what is possibly Jesus Christ's sermon on the mount.
Judah meets with Pontius Pilate, who fears Judah's victory will stoke rebellion against Roman rule. Judah rejects his patrimony and Roman citizenship. Returning to the leper colony, he reveals himself to Miriam who says that Tirzah is dying. Judah and Esther take his family to hear Christ, but the trial of Jesus has begun. While lugging his cross through the streets, Jesus collapses. Judah recognizes him as the man who gave him water earlier. Judah gives him water but a Roman soldier intervenes. As Judah witnesses Jesus' crucifixion, Miriam and Tirzah, sheltered in a cave with Esther during a violent storm, are miraculously cured.
Judah, freed of hate, returns to his house and finds them. Embracing, the four rejoice at the miracle.


== Cast ==


== Production ==

Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) originally announced a remake of the 1925 silent film Ben-Hur in December 1952, ostensibly as a way to spend its Italian assets. Stewart Granger and Robert Taylor were reported to be in the running for the lead. Nine months later, MGM announced it would make the film in CinemaScope, with shooting beginning in 1954. In November 1953, MGM announced it had assigned producer Sam Zimbalist to the picture and hired screenwriter Karl Tunberg to write it. Sidney Franklin was scheduled to direct, with Marlon Brando intended for the lead. In September 1955, Zimbalist, who continued to claim that Tunberg's script was complete, announced that a $7 million, six- to seven- month production would begin in April 1956 in either Israel or Egypt in MGM's new 65mm widescreen process, MGM Camera 65. MGM, however, suspended production in early 1956, following Franklin's resignation.By the late 1950s, the consent decree of 1948 forcing film studios to divest themselves of theater chains and the competitive pressure of television had caused significant financial distress at MGM. In a gamble to save the studio, and inspired by the success of Paramount Pictures' 1956 Biblical epic The Ten Commandments, studio head Joseph Vogel announced in 1957 that MGM would again move forward on a remake of Ben-Hur. Filming started in May 1958 and wrapped in January 1959, and post-production took six months. Although the budget for Ben-Hur was initially $7 million, it was reported to be $10 million by February 1958, reaching $15.175 million by the time shooting began—making it the costliest film ever produced up to that time. When adjusted for inflation, the budget of Ben Hur was approximately $152 million in constant dollars.One notable change in the film involved the opening titles. Concerned that a roaring Leo the Lion (the MGM mascot) would create the wrong mood for the sensitive and sacred nativity scene, Wyler received permission to replace the traditional logo with one in which Leo the Lion is quiet.


=== Development ===
Lew Wallace's 1880 novel, Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ, ran to about 550 pages. Zimbalist hired a number of screenwriters to cut the story down and turn the novel into a script. According to Gore Vidal, more than 12 versions of the script had been written by various writers by the spring of 1958. Vidal himself had been asked to write a version of the script in 1957, refused, and been placed on suspension for his decision. According to Vidal, Karl Tunberg was one of the last writers to work on the script. Other sources place Tunberg's initial involvement much earlier. Tunberg cut out everything in the book after the crucifixion of Jesus, omitted the sub-plot in which Ben-Hur fakes his death and raises a Jewish army to overthrow the Romans, and altered the manner in which the leperous women are healed. According to Wyler, Vidal, their biographers (see bibliography below) and the sources that follow them, Zimbalist was unhappy with Tunberg's script, considering it to be "pedestrian" and "unshootable".The writing effort changed direction when director Sidney Franklin fell ill and was removed from the production. Zimbalist offered the project to William Wyler, who had been one of 30 assistant directors on the 1925 film, in early 1957. Wyler initially rejected it, considering the quality of the script to be "very primitive, elementary" and no better than hack work. Zimbalist showed Wyler some preliminary storyboards for the chariot race and informed him that MGM would be willing to spend up to $10 million, and as a result, Wyler began to express an interest in the picture. MGM permitted Wyler to start casting, and in April 1957, mainstream media outlets reported that Wyler was giving screen tests to Italian leading men, such as Cesare Danova.Wyler did not formally agree to direct the film until September 1957, and MGM did not announce his hiring until January 3, 1958. Even though he still lacked a leading man, Wyler took the assignment for many reasons: He was promised a base salary of $350,000 as well as 8 percent of the gross box office (or 3 percent of the net profits, whichever was greater), and he wanted to work in Rome again (in Hollywood on the Tiber, where he had filmed Roman Holiday). His base salary was, at the time, the largest ever paid to a director for a single film. Professional competitive reasons also played a role in his decision to direct, and Wyler later admitted that he wished to outdo Cecil B. DeMille, and make a "thinking man's" Biblical epic. In later years, William Wyler would joke that it took a Jew to make a good film about Christ.


=== Writing ===
Wyler felt Tunberg's draft was too much of a morality play overlaid with current Western political overtones, and that the dialogue was too modern-sounding. Zimbalist brought in playwright S. N. Behrman (who also wrote the script for Quo Vadis) and then playwright Maxwell Anderson to write drafts. Gore Vidal biographer Fred Kaplan states that British poet and playwright Christopher Fry was hired simultaneously with Vidal, although most sources (including Vidal himself) state that Vidal followed Anderson, and that Fry did not come aboard until Vidal was close to leaving the picture. Vidal arrived in Rome in early March 1958 to meet with Wyler. Vidal claimed that Wyler had not read the script, and that when he did so (at Vidal's urging) on his flight from the U.S. to Italy, he was upset with the modernist dialogue. Vidal agreed to work on the script for three months so that he would come off suspension and fulfill his contract with MGM, although Zimbalist pushed him to stay throughout the entire production. Vidal was researching a book on the 4th century Roman emperor Julian and knew a great deal about ancient Rome. That book was eventually published in 1964 under the title Julian.Vidal's working style was to finish a scene and review it with Zimbalist. Once Vidal and Zimbalist had come to agreement, the scene would be passed to Wyler. Vidal said he kept the structure of the Tunberg/Behrman/Anderson script, but rewrote nearly all the dialogue. Vidal admitted to William Morris in March 1959 that Fry rewrote as much as a third of the dialogue which Vidal had added to the first half of the script. Vidal made one structural change which was not revised, however. The Tunberg script had Ben-Hur and Messala reuniting and falling out in a single scene. Vidal broke the scene in two, so that the men first reunite at the Castle Antonia and then later argue and end their friendship at Ben-Hur's home. Vidal also added small character touches to the script, such as Messala's purchase of a brooch for Tirzah and Ben-Hur's purchase of a horse for Messala. Vidal claimed that he worked on the first half of the script (everything up to the chariot race), and scripted 10 versions of the scene where Ben-Hur confronts Messala and begs for his family's freedom.Vidal's claim about a homoerotic subtext is hotly debated. Vidal first made the claim in an interview in the 1995 documentary film The Celluloid Closet, and asserted that he persuaded Wyler to direct Stephen Boyd to play the role as if he were a spurned homosexual lover. Vidal said that he believed that Messala's vindictiveness could only be motivated by the feeling of rejection that a lover would feel, and claimed to have suggested to Wyler that Stephen Boyd should play the role that way, and that Heston be kept in the dark about the Messala character's motivations. Whether Vidal wrote the scene in question or had the acting conversation with Wyler, and whether Wyler shot what Vidal wrote, remain issues of debate. Wyler himself said that he did not remember any conversation about this part of the script or Boyd's acting with Gore Vidal, and that he discarded Vidal's draft in favor of Fry's. Morgan Hudgens, publicity director for the film, however, wrote to Vidal in late May 1958 about the crucial scene, and implied there was a homosexual context: "...  the big cornpone [the crew's nickname for Heston] really threw himself into your 'first meeting' scene yesterday. You should have seen those boys embrace!" Film critic F. X. Feeney, in a comparison of script drafts, concludes that Vidal made significant and extensive contributions to the script.The final writer on the film was Christopher Fry. Charlton Heston has claimed that Fry was Wyler's first choice as screenwriter, but that Zimbalist forced him to use Vidal. Whether Fry worked on the script before Vidal or not, sources agree that Fry arrived in Rome in early May 1958 and spent six days a week on the set, writing and rewriting lines of dialogue as well as entire scenes, until the picture was finished. In particular, Fry gave the dialogue a slightly more formal and archaic tone without making it sound stilted and medieval. A highly publicized bitter dispute later broke out over screenplay credits to the film, involving Wyler, Tunberg, Vidal, Fry and the Screen Writers' Guild. In 1996, the Los Angeles Times published a brief letter from Charlton Heston taking issue with Vidal's version which, he wrote, "irritates the hell out of me". Three months later, the paper published a 1,200 word response from Vidal, which included the statement that, with regard to the controversial scene's subtext, he had been delegated to inform Boyd (who was "delighted"), but that Wyler had warned "don't tell Chuck because he'll fall apart".The final script ran to 230 pages. The screenplay differed more from the original novel than did the 1925 silent film version. Some changes made the film's storyline more dramatic. The role of Esther was greatly expanded from that of the novel to provide a strong onscreen love interest throughout the film. Other changes included incorporating an admiration for the Jewish culture and people (historical and modern), as well as representing the more pluralistic society of 1950s America rather than the "Christian superiority" view of Wallace's novel (though the movie retained a strongly positive religious portrayal of Early Christianity).


=== Casting ===
MGM opened a casting office in Rome in mid-1957 to select the 50,000 people who would act in minor roles and as extras in the film, and a total of 365 actors had speaking parts in the film, although only 45 of them were considered "principal" performers. In casting, Wyler placed heavy emphasis on characterization rather than looks or acting history. He typically cast the Romans with British actors and the Jews with American actors to help underscore the divide between the two groups. The Romans were the aristocrats in the film, and Wyler believed that American audiences would interpret British accents as patrician.Several actors were offered the role of Judah Ben-Hur before it was accepted by Charlton Heston. Burt Lancaster stated he turned down the role because he found the script boring and belittling to Christianity. Paul Newman turned it down because he said he didn't have the legs to wear a tunic. Marlon Brando, Rock Hudson, Geoffrey Horne, and Leslie Nielsen were also offered the role, as were a number of muscular, handsome Italian actors (many of whom did not speak English). Kirk Douglas was interested in the role, but was turned down in favor of Heston, who was formally cast on January 22, 1958. His salary was $250,000 for 30 weeks, a prorated salary for any time over 30 weeks, and travel expenses for his family.Stephen Boyd was cast as the antagonist, Messala, on April 13, 1958. William Wyler originally wanted Heston for the role, but sought another actor after he moved Heston into the role of Judah Ben-Hur. Because both Boyd and Heston had blue eyes, Wyler had Boyd outfitted with brown contact lenses as a way of contrasting the two men. Marie Ney was originally cast as Miriam, but was fired after two days of work because she could not cry on cue. Heston says that he was the one who suggested that Wyler cast Martha Scott as Miriam, and she was hired on July 17, 1958. Cathy O'Donnell was Wyler's sister-in-law, and although her career was in decline, Wyler cast her as Tirzah.More than 30 actresses were considered for the role of Esther. The Israeli actress Haya Harareet, a relative newcomer to film, was cast as Esther on May 16, 1958, after providing a 30-second silent screen test. Wyler had met her at the Cannes Film Festival, where she impressed him with her conversational skills and force of personality. Sam Jaffe was cast as Simonides on April 3, 1958, and Finlay Currie was cast as Balthasar on the same day. Wyler had to persuade Jack Hawkins to appear in the film, because Hawkins was unwilling to act in another epic motion picture so soon after The Bridge on the River Kwai. Hugh Griffith, who gained acclaim in the post-World War II era in Ealing Studios comedies, was cast as the colorful Sheik Ilderim. The role of Jesus, whose face is never seen, was played by an uncredited Claude Heater, an American opera singer performing with the Vienna State Opera in Rome when he was asked to do a screen test for the film.Myrna Hansen, who was crowned Miss USA in 1953, was considered for the role of a leper.


=== Cinematography ===
Robert L. Surtees, who had already filmed several of the most successful epics of the 1950s, was hired as cinematographer for the film. Early on in the film's production, Zimbalist and other MGM executives made the decision to film the picture in a widescreen format. Wyler strongly disliked the widescreen format, commenting that "Nothing is out of the picture, and you can't fill it. You either have a lot of empty space, or you have two people talking and a flock of others surrounding them who have nothing to do with the scene. Your eye just wanders out of curiosity." The cameras were also quite large, heavy, and difficult and time-consuming to move. To overcome these difficulties, Surtees and Wyler collaborated on using the widescreen lenses, film stocks, and projection technologies to create highly detailed images for the film. Wyler was best known for composition in depth, a visual technique in which people, props, and architecture are not merely composed horizontally but in depth of field as well. He also had a strong preference for long takes, during which his actors could move within this highly detailed space.The movie was filmed in a process known as "MGM Camera 65". 1957's Raintree County was the first MGM film to use the process. The MGM Camera 65 used special 65 mm Eastmancolor film stock with a 2.76:1 aspect ratio. 70 mm anamorphic camera lenses developed by the Mitchell Camera Company were manufactured to specifications submitted by MGM. These lenses squeezed the image down 1.25 times to fit on the image area of the film stock. Because the film could be adapted to the requirements of individual theaters, movie houses did not need to install special, expensive 70 mm projection equipment. Six of the 70 mm lenses, each worth $100,000, were shipped to Rome for use by the production.


=== Principal photography ===

Pre-production began at Cinecittà Studios around October 1957. The MGM Art Department produced more than 15,000 sketches and drawings of costumes, sets, props, and other items needed for the film (8,000 alone for the costumes); photostatted each item; and cross-referenced and catalogued them for use by the production design team and fabricators. More than a million props were ultimately manufactured. Construction of miniatures for the entrance of Quintus Arrius into Rome and for the sea battle were underway by the end of November 1957. MGM location scouts arrived in Rome to identify shooting locations in August 1957. Location shooting in Africa was actively under consideration, and in mid-January 1958, MGM said that filming in North Africa (later revealed to be Libya) would begin on March 1, 1958, and that 200 camels and 2,500 horses had already been procured for the studio's use there. The production was then scheduled to move to Rome on April 1, where Andrew Marton had been hired as second unit director and 72 horses were being trained for the chariot race sequence. However, the Libyan government canceled the production's film permit for religious reasons on March 11, 1958, just a week before filming was to have begun. It is unclear whether any second unit filming took place in Israel. A June 8, 1958, report in The New York Times said second unit director Andrew Marton had roamed "up and down the countryside" filming footage. However, the American Film Institute claims the filming permit was revoked in Israel for religious reasons as well (although when is not clear), and no footage from the planned location shooting near Jerusalem appeared in the film.Principal photography began in Rome on May 18, 1958. The script was still unfinished when cinematography began, so that Wyler had only read the first 10 to 12 pages of it. Shooting lasted for 12 to 14 hours a day, six days a week. On Sundays, Wyler would meet with Fry and Zimbalist for story conferences. The pace of the film was so grueling that a doctor was brought onto the set to give a vitamin B complex injection to anyone who requested it (shots which Wyler and his family later suspected may have contained amphetamines). To speed things up, Wyler often kept principal actors on stand-by, in full costume and make-up, so that he could shoot pick-up scenes if the first unit slowed down. Actresses Martha Scott and Cathy O'Donnell spent almost the entire month of November 1958 in full leprosy make-up and costumes so that Wyler could shoot "leper scenes" when other shots did not go well. Wyler was unhappy with Heston's performances, feeling they did not make Judah Ben-Hur a plausible character, and Heston had to reshoot "I'm a Jew" 16 times. Shooting took nine months, which included three months for the chariot race scene alone. Principal photography ended on January 7, 1959, with filming of the crucifixion scene, which took four days to shoot.


=== Production design ===
Italy was MGM's top choice for hosting the production. However, a number of countries—including France, Mexico, Spain, and the United Kingdom—were also considered. Cinecittà Studios, a very large motion picture production facility constructed in 1937 on the outskirts of Rome, was identified early on as the primary shooting location. Zimbalist hired Wyler's long-term production supervisor, Henry Henigson, to oversee the film, and art directors William A. Horning and Edward Carfagno created the overall look of the film, relying on the more than five years of research which had already been completed for the production. A skeleton crew of studio technicians arrived in the summer of 1956 to begin preparing the Cinecittà soundstages and back lot.The Ben-Hur production utilized 300 sets scattered over 148 acres (60 ha) and nine sound stages. Several sets still standing from Quo Vadis in 1951 were refurbished and used for Ben-Hur. By the end of the production more than 1,000,000 pounds (450,000 kg) of plaster and 40,000 cubic feet (1,100 m3) of lumber were used. The budget called for more than 100,000 costumes and 1,000 suits of armor to be made, for the hiring of 10,000 extras, and the procurement of hundreds of camels, donkeys, horses, and sheep. Costume designer Elizabeth Haffenden oversaw a staff of 100 wardrobe fabricators who began manufacturing the costumes for the film a year before filming began. Special silk was imported from Thailand, the armor manufactured in West Germany, and the woolens made and embroidered in the United Kingdom and various countries of South America. Many leather goods were hand-tooled in the United Kingdom as well, while Italian shoemakers manufactured the boots and shoes. The lace for costumes came from France, while costume jewelry was purchased in Switzerland. More than 400 pounds (180 kg) of hair were donated by women in the Piedmont region of Italy to make wigs and beards for the production, and 1,000 feet (300 m) of track laid down for the camera dollies. A workshop employing 200 artists and workmen provided the hundreds of friezes and statues needed. The mountain village of Arcinazzo Romano, 40 miles (64 km) from Rome, served as a stand-in for the town of Nazareth. Beaches near Anzio were also used, and caves just south of the city served as the leper colony. Some additional desert panoramas were shot in Arizona, and some close-up inserts taken at the MGM Studios, with the final images photographed on February 3, 1958.

			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
The sea battle was one of the first sequences created for the film, filmed using miniatures in a huge tank on the back lot at the MGM Studios in Culver City, California, in November and December 1957. More than 40 miniature ships and two 175-foot (53 m) long Roman galleys, each of them seaworthy, were built for the live-action segment. The ships were constructed based on plans found in Italian museums for actual ancient Roman galleys. An artificial lake with equipment capable of generating sea-sized waves was built at the Cinecittà studios to accommodate the galleys. A massive backdrop, 200 feet (61 m) wide by 50 feet (15 m) high, was painted and erected to hide the city and hills in the background. To make the scene bloodier, Dunning sought out Italian extras who had missing limbs, then had the makeup crews rig them with fake bone and blood to make it appear as if they had lost a hand or leg during the battle. When Dunning edited his own footage later, he made sure that these men were not on screen for so long that audiences would be upset. The above-decks footage was integrated with the miniature work using process shots and traveling mattes.One of the most lavish sets was the villa of Quintus Arrius, which included 45 working fountains and 8.9 miles (14.3 km) of pipes. Wealthy citizens and nobles of Rome, who wanted to portray their ancient selves, acted as extras in the villa scenes. To recreate the ancient city streets of Jerusalem, a vast set covering 0.5-square-mile (1.3 km2) was built, which included a 75-foot (23 m) high Joppa Gate. The sets were so vast and visually exciting that they became a tourist attraction, and various film stars visited during production. The huge sets could be seen from the outskirts of Rome, and MGM estimated that more than 5,000 people were given tours of the sets.Dismantling the sets cost $125,000. Almost all the filmmaking equipment was turned over to the Italian government, which sold and exported it. MGM turned title to the artificial lake over to Cinecittà. MGM retained control over the costumes and the artificial lake background, which went back to the United States. The chariots were also returned to the U.S., where they were used as promotional props. The life-size galleys and pirate ships were dismantled to prevent them from being used by competing studios. Some of the horses were adopted by the men who trained them, while others were sold. Many of the camels, donkeys, and other exotic animals were sold to circuses and zoos in Europe.


=== Editing ===
A total of 1,100,000 feet (340,000 m) of footage was shot for the film. According to editor John D. Dunning, the first cut of the film was four and a half hours long. William Wyler stated that his goal was to bring the running time down to three and a half hours. The most difficult editing decisions, according to Dunning, came during scenes that involved Jesus Christ, as these contained almost no dialogue and most of the footage was purely reaction shots by actors. Dunning also believed that in the final cut the leper scene was too long and needed trimming. Editing was also complicated by the 70mm footage being printed. Because no editing equipment (such as the Moviola) existed which could handle the 70mm print, the 70mm footage would be reduced to 35mm and then cut. This caused much of the image to be lost. When the film was edited into its final form, it ran 213 minutes and included just 19,000 feet (5,800 m) of film.


=== Musical score ===
The film score was composed and conducted by Miklós Rózsa, who had scored Quo Vadis and most of MGM's historical films of the 1950s. Rózsa researched Greek and Roman music, incorporating this work into his score for authenticity. Rózsa himself directed the 100-piece MGM Symphony Orchestra during the 12 recording sessions (which stretched over 72 hours). The soundtrack was recorded in six-channel stereo. More than three hours of music were composed for the film, and two-and-a-half hours of it were finally used, making it at the time the longest score ever composed for a motion picture. It was finally surpassed in 2021 by the near 4-hour long score of Zack Snyder's Justice League.Rózsa won his third Academy Award for his score. Like most film musical soundtracks, it was issued as an album for the public to enjoy as a distinct piece of music. The score was so lengthy that it had to be released in 1959 on three LP records, although a one-LP version with Carlo Savina conducting the Symphony Orchestra of Rome was also issued. In addition, to provide a more "listenable" album, Rózsa arranged his score into a "Ben-Hur Suite", which was released on Lion Records (an MGM subsidiary that issued low-priced records) in 1959. This made the Ben-Hur film musical score the first to be released not only in its entirety but also as a separate album.The Ben-Hur score has been considered the best of Rózsa's career. The musical soundtrack to Ben-Hur remained deeply influential into the mid-1970s, when film music composed by John Williams for films such as Jaws, Star Wars, and Raiders of the Lost Ark became more popular among composers and film-goers. Rózsa's score has since seen several notable re-releases, including by the Nuremberg Symphony Orchestra on Capitol Records in 1967, several of the tracks by the United Kingdom's National Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus on Decca Records in 1977 and a Sony Music reissue as a two-CD set in 1991. In 2012, Film Score Monthly WaterTower Music issued a limited edition five-CD set of music from the film. A two-CD set was released by Tadlow Music in 2017 of the complete motion picture score by The City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus.


== Chariot race sequence ==
The chariot race in Ben-Hur was directed by Andrew Marton and Yakima Canutt, filmmakers who often acted as second unit directors on other people's films. Each man had an assistant director, who shot additional footage. Among these were Sergio Leone, who was senior assistant director in the second unit and responsible for retakes. William Wyler shot the "pageantry" sequence that occurs before the race, scenes of the jubilant crowd, and the victory scenes after the race concludes. The "pageantry" sequence before the race begins is a shot-by-shot remake of the same sequence from the 1925 silent film version. Knowing that the chariot race would be primarily composed of close-up and medium shots, Wyler added the parade in formation (even though it was not historically accurate) to impress the audience with the grandeur of the arena.


=== Set design ===
The chariot arena was modelled on a historic circus in Jerusalem. Covering 18 acres (7.3 ha), it was the largest film set ever built at that time. Constructed at a cost of $1 million, it took a thousand workmen more than a year to carve the oval out of a rock quarry. The racetrack featured 1,500-foot (460 m) long straights and five-story-high grandstands. Over 250 miles (400 km) of metal tubing were used to erect the grandstands. Matte paintings created the illusion of upper stories of the grandstands and the background mountains. More than 40,000 short tons (36,000 t) of sand were brought in from beaches on the Mediterranean to cover the track. Other elements of the circus were also historically accurate. Imperial Roman racecourses featured a raised 10-foot (3.0 m) high spina (the center section), metae (columnar goalposts at each end of the spina), dolphin-shaped lap counters, and carceres (the columned building in the rear which housed the cells where horses waited prior to the race). The four statues atop the spina were 30 feet (9.1 m) high. A chariot track identical in size was constructed next to the set and used to train the horses and lay out camera shots.


=== Preparation ===
Planning for the chariot race took nearly a year to complete. Seventy-eight horses were bought and imported from Yugoslavia and Sicily in November 1957, exercised into peak physical condition, and trained by Hollywood animal handler Glenn Randall to pull the quadriga (a Roman Empire chariot drawn by four horses abreast). Andalusian horses played Ben-Hur's Arabians, while the others in the chariot race were primarily Lipizzans. A veterinarian, a harness maker, and 20 stable boys were employed to care for the horses and ensure they were outfitted for racing each day. The firm of Danesi Brothers built 18 chariots, nine of which were used for practice, each weighing 900 pounds (410 kg). Principal cast members, stand-ins, and stunt people made 100 practice laps of the arena in preparation for shooting.Heston and Boyd both had to learn how to drive a chariot. Heston, an experienced horseman, took daily three-hour lessons in chariot driving after he arrived in Rome and picked up the skill quickly. Heston was outfitted with special contact lenses to prevent the grit kicked up during the race from injuring his eyes. For the other charioteers, six actors with extensive experience with horses were flown in from Hollywood, including Giuseppe Tosi, who had once been a bodyguard for Victor Emmanuel III of Italy.


=== Filming ===
The chariot scene took five weeks (spread over three months) to film at a total cost of $1 million and required more than 200 miles (320 km) of racing to complete. Marton and Yakima Canutt filmed the entire chariot sequence with stunt doubles in long shot, edited the footage together, and showed the footage to Zimbalist, Wyler, and Heston to show them what the race should look like and to indicate where close-up shots with Heston and Boyd should go. Seven thousand extras were hired to cheer in the stands. Economic conditions in Italy were poor at the time, and as shooting for the chariot scene wound down, only 1,500 extras were needed on any given day. On June 6, 1958, more than 3,000 people seeking work were turned away. The crowd rioted, throwing stones and assaulting the set's gates until police arrived and dispersed them. Dynamite charges were used to show the chariot wheels and axles splintering from the effects of Messala's barbed-wheel attacks. Three lifelike dummies were placed at key points in the race to give the appearance of men being run over by chariots.The cameras used during the chariot race also presented problems. The 70mm lenses had a minimum focusing distance of 50 feet (15 m), and the camera was mounted on a small Italian-made car so the camera crew could keep in front of the chariots. The horses, however, accelerated down the 1,500-foot (460 m) straight much faster than the car could, and the long focal length left Marton and Canutt with too little time to get their shots. The production company purchased a more powerful American car, but the horses were still too fast, and even with a head start, the filmmakers only had a few more seconds of shot time. As filming progressed, vast amounts of footage were shot for this sequence. The ratio of footage shot to footage used was 263:1, one of the highest ratios ever for a film.One of the most notable moments in the race came from a near-fatal accident when stunt man Joe Canutt, Yakima Canutt's son, was tossed into the air by accident; he incurred a minor chin injury. Marton wanted to keep the shot, but Zimbalist felt the footage was unusable. Marton conceived the idea of showing that Ben-Hur was able to land on and cling to the front of his chariot, then scramble back into the quadriga while the horses kept going. The long shot of Canutt's accident was cut together with a close-up of Heston climbing back aboard, resulting in one of the race's most memorable moments. Boyd did all but two of his own stunts. For the sequence where Messala is dragged beneath a chariot's horses and trampled, Boyd wore steel armor under his costume and acted out the close-up shot and the shot of him on his back, attempting to climb up into the horses' harness to escape injury. A dummy was used to obtain the trampling shot in this sequence.Several urban legends exist regarding the chariot sequence. One claims that a stuntman died during filming, which Nosher Powell claims in his autobiography, and another states that a red Ferrari can be seen during the chariot race. The book Movie Mistakes claims this is a myth. Heston, in a DVD commentary track for the film, mentions that a third urban legend claims that he wore a wristwatch during the chariot race, but points out that he wore leather bracers up to the elbow.


== Release ==
A massive $14.7 million marketing effort helped promote Ben-Hur. MGM established a special "Ben-Hur Research Department" which surveyed more than 2,000 high schools in 47 American cities to gauge teenage interest in the film. A high school study guide was also created and distributed. Sindlinger and Company was hired to conduct a nationwide survey to gauge the impact of the marketing campaign. In 1959 and 1960, more than $20 million in candy; children's tricycles in the shape of chariots; gowns; hair barrettes; items of jewelry; men's ties; bottles of perfume; "Ben-Her" and "Ben-His" towels; toy armor, helmets, and swords; umbrellas; and hardback and paperback versions of the novel (tied to the film with cover art) were sold.Ben-Hur premiered at Loew's State Theatre in New York City on November 18, 1959. Present at the premiere were William Wyler, Charlton Heston, Stephen Boyd, Haya Harareet, Martha Scott, Ramon Novarro (who played Judah Ben-Hur in the 1925 silent film version), Spyros Skouras (president of the 20th Century Fox), Barney Balaban (president of Paramount Pictures), Jack L. Warner (president of Warner Bros.), Leonard Goldenson (president of the American Broadcasting Company), Moss Hart (playwright), Robert Kintner (an ABC Television executive), Sidney Kingsley (playwright), and Adolph Zukor (founder of Paramount Pictures).


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
During its initial release the film earned $33.6 million in North American theater rentals (the distributor's share of the box office), generating approximately $74.7 million in box office sales. It was number one at the monthly US box office for six months. Outside of North America, it earned $32.5 million in rentals (about $72.2 million at the box office) for a worldwide total of $66.1 million in rental earnings, roughly equivalent to $146.9 million in box office receipts. It was the fastest-grossing film as well as the highest-grossing film of 1959, in the process becoming the second-highest-grossing film of all-time (at that time) behind Gone with the Wind. Ben-Hur saved MGM from financial disaster, making a profit of $20,409,000 on its initial release, and another $10.1 million in profits when re-released in 1969. By 1989, Ben-Hur had earned $90 million in worldwide theatrical rentals.


=== Critical reception ===
Ben-Hur received overwhelmingly positive reviews upon its release. Bosley Crowther, writing for The New York Times, called Ben-Hur "a remarkably intelligent and engrossing human drama". While praising the acting and William Wyler's "close-to" direction, he also had high praise for the chariot race: "There has seldom been anything in movies to compare with this picture's chariot race. It is a stunning complex of mighty setting, thrilling action by horses and men, panoramic observation and overwhelming use of dramatic sound." Jack Gaver, writing for United Press International, also had praise for the acting, calling it full of "genuine warmth and fervor and finely acted intimate scenes". Philip K. Scheuer of the Los Angeles Times called it "magnificent, inspiring, awesome, enthralling, and all the other adjectives you have been reading about it". He also called the editing "generally expert" although at times abrupt. Ronald Holloway, writing for Variety, called Ben-Hur "a majestic achievement, representing a superb blending of the motion picture arts by master craftsmen", and concluded that "Gone With the Wind, Metro's own champion all-time top grosser, will eventually have to take a back seat". The chariot race "will probably be preserved in film archives as the finest example of the use of the motion picture camera to record an action sequence. The race, directed by Andrew Marton and Yakima Canutt, represents some 40 minutes  [sic] of the most hair-raising excitement that film audiences have ever witnessed."Crowther felt the film was too long. Scheuer, while generally praising the film, felt that its biggest fault was "overstatement", and that it hammered home at points long after they had been made. He singled out the galley rowing sequence, Jesus's journey to the place of crucifixion, and nearly all the sequences involving the lepers. He also lightly criticized Charlton Heston for being more physically than emotionally compelling. John McCarten of The New Yorker was more critical of Heston, writing that he "speaks English as if he'd learned it from records". Film critic Dwight Macdonald also was largely negative. He found the film so uninvolving and lengthy that he "felt like a motorist trapped at a railroad crossing while a long freight train slowly trundles by". British film critic John Pym, writing for Time Out, called the film a "four-hour Sunday school lesson". Many French and American film critics who subscribed to the auteur theory saw the film as confirmation of their belief that William Wyler was "merely a commercial craftsman" rather than a serious artist.In December 1959, in her review for the London Sunday Times, the veteran British film critic Dilys Powell expressed many serious reservations but still lavished praise on the film:

It is the best chariot race in the world, and no mistake. By now everybody has said so, and ... [my] only hope is that admiration may have special force when it is extorted from somebody who dislikes chariot races, shrinks from Biblical fiction and detests films ... which include the Crucifixion ...
... of the parts of this long, opulent film with its colour, its bright, sharp images, its stunning spectacle and its size ... I cannot complain. I still find that the whole is alien from me ...

... Nevertheless, if we must have films of this kind this is the one to have. After all, the spectacular scenes remain: the sea-fight, the Triumph, a magnificent storm and, of course, the chariot race—a scene superbly shot, superbly edited, superb in every way. I have never seen anything of its sort to touch it for excitement.
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 85% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 54 reviews collected, with an average rating of 8.20/10. The critics consensus reads, "Uneven, but in terms of epic scope and grand spectacle, Ben-Hur still ranks among Hollywood's finest examples of pure entertainment." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 90 out of 100 based on 9 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".The Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa cited this movie as one of his 100 favorite films.


=== Accolades ===
Ben-Hur was nominated for 12 Academy Awards and won an unprecedented 11. As of 2023, only Titanic in 1998 and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King in 2004 have matched the film's wins. The only category that Ben-Hur did not win was for Best Adapted Screenplay (losing to Room at the Top), and most observers attributed this to the controversy over the writing credit. MGM and Panavision shared a special technical Oscar in March 1960 for developing the Camera 65 photographic process.Ben-Hur also won three Golden Globe Awards – Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture for Stephen Boyd – and received a Special Achievement Award (which went to Andrew Marton for directing the chariot race sequence). Heston was nominated for a Golden Globe in the Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama category, but did not win. The picture also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film, the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film, and the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in a Motion Picture for William Wyler's masterful direction.Ben-Hur also appears on several "best of" lists generated by the American Film Institute, an independent non-profit organization created by the National Endowment for the Arts in 1967. The "AFI 100 Years... series" were created by juries consisting of over 1,500 artists, scholars, critics, and historians, with movies selected based on the film's popularity over time, historical significance, and cultural impact. Ben-Hur appeared at #72 on the 100 Movies, #49 on the 100 Thrills, #21 on the Film Scores, #56 on the 100 Cheers and #2 on the AFI's 10 Top 10 Epic film lists. In 2004, the National Film Preservation Board selected Ben-Hur for preservation by the National Film Registry for being a "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" motion picture. It was listed as number 491 on Empire's 500 Greatest films of all time.


=== Broadcast ===
The film's first telecast took place on Sunday, February 14, 1971. In what was a television first for a Hollywood film, it was broadcast over five hours (including commercials) during a single evening by CBS, preempting all of that network's regular programming for that one evening. It was watched by 85.82 million people for a 37.1 average rating. It was one of the highest-rated movies ever screened on television at the time (behind the broadcast premieres of The Birds and Bridge on the River Kwai).


=== Home media ===
Ben-Hur has been released on home video on several occasions. A two-sided single disc widescreen release occurred in the United States on March 13, 2001. This release included several featurettes, including a commentary by Charlton Heston, a making-of documentary (made for a laserdisc release in 1993), screen tests, and a photo gallery. This edition was released soon thereafter as a two-disc set in other countries. The film saw another DVD release on September 13, 2005. This four-disc edition included remastered images and audio, an additional commentary, two additional featurettes, and a complete version of the 1925 silent version of Ben-Hur. A boxed "Deluxe Edition", issued in the U.S. in 2002, included postcard-sized reprints of lobby cards, postcard-sized black-and-white stills with machine-reproduced autographs of cast members, a matte-framed color image from the film with a 35mm film frame mounted below it, and a 27-by-40-inch (69 by 102 cm) reproduction film poster.In 2011, Warner Home Video released a 50th anniversary edition on Blu-ray Disc and DVD, making it the first home release where the film is present on its original aspect ratio. For this release, the film was completely restored frame by frame from an 8K scan of the original 65mm negative. The restoration cost $1 million, and was one of the highest resolution restorations ever made by Warner Bros. A new musical soundtrack-only option and six new featurettes (one of which was an hour long) were also included.


=== Ban in China ===
The movie was banned in China under the regime of Mao Zedong for containing "propaganda of superstitious beliefs, namely Christianity".


== Adaptations ==
Comic book • Dell Four Color #1052 (November 1959) • 32 pages in full color, plus covers • Published by Dell Publishing Co., Inc. • Designed and produced by Western Printing and Lithographing Co. • Copyright © 1959 by Loew's Incorporated • (cover painting by Sam Savitt • drawn by Russ Manning) [authorized movie tie-in]
Video game • Ben-Hur: Blood of Braves (January 2003) • PlayStation 2 • Developed and published by Microids • Chariot racing game


== See also ==
List of American films of 1959
List of historical drama films
List of films set in ancient Rome
List of films featuring slavery
List of Academy Award records


== References ==
Notes
Citations


== Bibliography ==


== External links ==

Ben-Hur essay by Gabriel Miller at National Film Registry
Ben-Hur essay by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010 ISBN 0826429777, pages 558-560
Ben-Hur at IMDb 
Ben-Hur at the American Film Institute Catalog
Ben-Hur at AllMovie
Ben-Hur at the TCM Movie Database
Ben-Hur at Rotten Tomatoes12 Years a Slave (film)
17th Golden Globe Awards
1917 (2019 film)
2001: A Space Odyssey (film)
20th Century Fox
32nd Academy Awards
70 mm film
A. Arnold Gillespie
AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores
AFI's 10 Top 10
AFI 100 Years... series
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
AMC Networks
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Heart in Winter
A House Divided (1931 film)
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Separation
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Academy Awards
Action film
Adolph Zukor
Adoption in ancient Rome
Akira Kurosawa
Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore
AllMovie
All About Eve
All About My Mother
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Amadeus (film)
Amarcord
American Antiquarian Society
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Broadcasting Company
American Film Institute
American Hustle
Amphetamine
An American in Paris (film)
Anamorphic
Andalusian horse
Andrew Marton
André Morell
Anne of the Thousand Days
Annie Hall
Antonia Fortress
Antony and Cleopatra (1972 film)
Anybody Here Seen Kelly?
Anzio
Arcinazzo Romano
Argo (2012 film)
Arizona
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Aspect ratio (image)
Assistant director
Atonement (2007 film)
Au revoir les enfants
Auteur theory
Avatar (2009 film)
BAFTA Award for Best Film
B vitamins
Babel (film)
Ballad of a Soldier
Balthazar (Magus)
Barney Balaban
Barrette
Becket (1964 film)
Belfast (film)
Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ
Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ (1925 film)
Ben-Hur (1925 film)
Ben-Hur (1992 film)
Ben-Hur (2016 film)
Ben-Hur (play)
Ben Hur (1907 film)
Ben Hur (2003 film)
Ben Hur (miniseries)
Ben Hur Live
Biblical Magi
Bicycle Thieves
Billboard (magazine)
Bipack
Birdman (film)
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Bosley Crowther
Boyhood (2014 film)
Bracer
Braveheart
Bridge of Spies (film)
Bridge on the River Kwai
British Board of Film Classification
Broadcast News (film)
Broadcasting & Cable
Brokeback Mountain
Bugsy
Burt Lancaster
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
CBS Interactive
CNET
CODA (2021 film)
Cabaret (1972 film)
Caliga
Camera dolly
Cannes Film Festival
Capitol Records
Carlo Savina
Carol (film)
Carrie (1952 film)
Casablanca (film)
Cathy O'Donnell
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Cecil B. DeMille
Cesare Danova
Chariots of Fire
Charlton Heston
Chicago (2002 film)
Chinatown (1974 film)
Christopher Fry
Cimarron (1931 film)
Cinecittà
CinemaScope
Circus (building)
Citizen Kane
Classic Images
Claude Heater
Close-up
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Come and Get It (1936 film)
Compact Disc
Composition (visual arts)
Constant dollars
Coronet (magazine)
Costume designer
Counsellor at Law
Crash (2004 film)
Cries and Whispers
Culver City, California
Cyrano de Bergerac (1990 film)
Dances with Wolves
Darling (1965 film)
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Film
Day for Night (film)
Dead End (1937 film)
Dead Poets Society
Debbie Reynolds
Debbie Reynolds auctions
Decca Records
Dell Comics
Dell Publishing
Depth of field
Desert Dust
Detective Story (1951 film)
Dilys Powell
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Django Unchained
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dodsworth (film)
Dr. Strangelove
Drive My Car (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
Dunkirk (2017 film)
Dwight Macdonald
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
Ealing Studios
East of Eden (film)
Eastmancolor
Educating Rita (film)
Edward Carfagno
Elizabeth Haffenden
Empire (film magazine)
Entr'acte
Epic film
Esther (character)
Everything Everywhere All at Once
F. X. Feeney
Fandango Media
Fanny and Alexander
Far from Heaven
Fargo (1996 film)
Ferrari
Film Score Monthly
Films and Filming
Filmsite.org
Finlay Currie
First Cow
Five Came Back (TV series)
Five Easy Pieces
Forbes
Forbidden Games
Forrest Gump
Four Color
Four Weddings and a Funeral
Frank Thring
Franklin Milton
Fred Kaplan (biographer)
Friendly Persuasion (1956 film)
Frieze
From Here to Eternity
Funny Girl (film)
Galley slave
Gandhi (film)
Gentleman's Agreement
Geoffrey Horne
George Relph
Gervaise (film)
Gigi (1958 film)
Gladiator
Gladiator (2000 film)
Glamour (1934 film)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Gone with the Wind (film)
Goodfellas
Google News Archive
Gore Vidal
Gran Torino
Grand Comics Database
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Green Book (film)
Gross rental
Guess Who's Coming to Dinner
Hack writer
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hannah and Her Sisters
Hard Fists
Haya Harareet
Hell's Heroes (film)
Henry Willson
Her First Mate
Hereafter (film)
High Noon
Hollywood on the Tiber
How Green Was My Valley (film)
How to Steal a Million
Howards End (film)
Hugh Griffith
Hugh Hunt
IGN
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
In Which We Serve
In the Heat of the Night (film)
In the Name of the Father (film)
Inglourious Basterds
Intermission
Internet Archive
It Happened One Night
Iudaea Province
Jack Hawkins
Jack L. Warner
Jaffa Gate
Javelin
Jaws (soundtrack)
Jean de Florette
Jerusalem
Jesus
Jesus Christ
Jesus Christ Superstar (film)
Jeuxvideo.com
Jezebel (1938 film)
John Dunning (film editor)
John J. McCusker
John McCarten
John Williams
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
José Greci
Judah Ben-Hur
Judgment at Nuremberg
Julia (1977 film)
Julian (novel)
Julian the Apostate
Karl Tunberg
Killers of the Flower Moon (film)
Kirk Douglas
Kramer vs. Kramer
L.A. Confidential (film)
LP record
La La Land
La Ronde (1950 film)
Lacombe, Lucien
Lady Bird (film)
Laserdisc
Laurence Payne
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Lazy Lightning
Leaving Las Vegas
Leo the Lion (MGM)
Leonard Goldenson
Leprosy
Leslie Nielsen
Lew Wallace
Library of Congress
Libya
Life (magazine)
Lifta
Lipizzan
Lira
List of Academy Award-winning films
List of Academy Award records
List of American films of 1959
List of films featuring slavery
List of films set in ancient Rome
List of highest-grossing films
List of historical drama films
List of posthumous Academy Award winners and nominees
List of religious films
Lobby card
Loew's Incorporated
Loew's State Theatre (New York City)
Loews Cineplex Entertainment
Los Angeles Times
Louella Parsons
Love Story (1970 film)
Macedonia (Roman province)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Mao Zedong
Marathon Man (film)
Marie Ney
Marlon Brando
Martha Scott
Marty (film)
Mary, mother of Jesus
Matte (filmmaking)
Matte painting
Maxwell Anderson
Medium shot
Memphis Belle: A Story of a Flying Fortress
Mephisto (1981 film)
Metacritic
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Microids
Midnight Cowboy
Midnight Express (film)
Miklós Rózsa
Milk (2008 American film)
Million Dollar Baby
Milo Lory
Miss USA
Moonlight (2016 film)
Moss Hart
Moviola
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mrs. Miniver
Mulholland Drive (film)
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Left Foot
Myrna Hansen
Nashville (film)
National Endowment for the Arts
National Film Preservation Board
National Film Registry
National Philharmonic Orchestra
Nativity of Jesus
Nazareth
Nelly and Mr. Arnaud
New York City
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
Newspapers.com
No Country for Old Men
Nocturnal Animals
Nomadland
Nosher Powell
Nuremberg Symphony Orchestra
Oliver! (film)
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Open access
Ordinary People
Out of Africa (film)
Overture
Panavision
Paramount Pictures
Parasite (2019 film)
Patton (film)
Paul Newman
Pavilion Books
Photostat machine
Piedmont
Platoon (film)
PlayStation 2
Pontius Pilate
Post-production
Pre-production
Prefect
Prizzi's Honor
Production of Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Prologue
Property
Pulp Fiction
Quadriga
Quiz Show (film)
Quo Vadis (1951 film)
Racing game
Raiders of the Lost Ark (soundtrack)
Rain Man
Raintree County (film)
Raise the Red Lantern
Ralph E. Winters
Ramon Novarro
Rebecca (1940 film)
Reds (film)
Remake
Review aggregator
Reynold Brown
Richard III (1955 film)
Ridicule (film)
Robert Kintner
Robert MacDonald (visual effects)
Robert Surtees (cinematographer)
Robert Taylor (American actor)
Rock Hudson
Rocky
Roma (2018 film)
Roman Consul
Roman Empire
Roman Holiday
Roman galley
Room at the Top (1959 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Russ Manning
Ryan's Daughter
S. N. Behrman
Saint Joseph
Sam Jaffe
Sam Savitt
Sam Zimbalist
Saving Private Ryan
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Scythed chariot
Second unit
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Sergio Leone
Shakespeare in Love
Sheik Ilderim
Sic
Sicily
Sideways
Sidney Franklin (director)
Sidney Kingsley
Slumdog Millionaire
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Sons and Lovers (film)
Sony Music Entertainment
Sony Pictures Studios
Sound stage
Spartacus (film)
Spotlight (film)
Spyros Skouras
Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope (soundtrack)
Stephen Boyd
Stewart Granger
Storyboard
Straight Shootin'
Suicide
Sunday Bloody Sunday (film)
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Suspension (punishment)
Terence Longdon
Terms of Endearment
The Accidental Tourist (film)
The Advocate (magazine)
The Agony and the Ecstasy (film)
The American Film Institute Catalog of Motion Pictures
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Barbarian Invasions
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Big Country
The Birds (film)
The Border Cavalier
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Cardinal
The Celluloid Closet (film)
The Children's Hour (film)
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Collector (1965 film)
The Commitments (film)
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Departed
The Descendants
The Desperate Hours (1955 film)
The Elephant Man (film)
The English Patient (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The French Connection (film)
The Full Monty
The Gay Deception
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Good Fairy (1935 film)
The Graduate
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Heiress
The Hours (film)
The Hurt Locker
The Hustler
The Informer (1935 film)
The Irishman
The Killing Fields (film)
The King's Speech
The Last Emperor
The Letter (1940 film)
The Liberation of L.B. Jones
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Little Foxes (film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Love Trap (1929 film)
The Man Who Wasn't There (2001 film)
The New York Times
The New York Times Book Review
The New Yorker
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Player (1992 film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Prince and the Showgirl
The Purple Rose of Cairo
The Queen (2006 film)
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Robe (film)
The Robesonian
The Shakedown (1929 film)
The Shape of Water
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Social Network
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sound Barrier
The Sound of Music (film)
The Sting
The Stolen Ranch
The Storm (1930 film)
The Sunday Times
The Taste of Others
The Ten Commandments (1956 film)
The Towering Inferno
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Wages of Fear
The Westerner (1940 film)
The Wishing Tree (1976 film)
These Three
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Thunder Riders (film)
Thunderbolt (1947 film)
Tiberius
Tiberius Caesar
Time Out (company)
Timeline of most expensive films
Titanic (1997 film)
Tom Brown of Culver
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Topsy-Turvy
Traffic (2000 film)
Train of Life
Trial of Jesus
Turner Classic Movies
Tár
Ultra Panavision 70
Unforgiven
United 93 (film)
United Press International
United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc.
Urban legend
Variety (magazine)
Veterinarian
Victor Davis Hanson
Victor Emmanuel III of Italy
Vienna
Vienna State Opera
Warner Bros.
Warner Home Video
Watch on the Rhine
WaterTower Music
Webedia
West Germany
West Side Story (1961 film)
Western Publishing
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (film)
Widescreen
William A. Horning
William Morris Agency
William Wyler
Wings (1927 film)
Wrap (filmmaking)
Writers Guild of America, West
Wuthering Heights (1939 film)
Yakima Canutt
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Z (1969 film)
Zack Snyder's Justice League
Zero Dark Thirty
Ziff Davis
http://www.brightlightsfilm.com/52/benhur.php
http://www.filmsite.org/oscars2.html
http://filmscoremonthly.com/notes/ben_hur.html
http://reviews.cnet.com/2300-6482_7-10000620-5.html
http://brightlightsfilm.com/getting-it-right-the-second-time-adapting-ben-hur-for-the-screen
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1960
https://books.google.com/books?id=V_8EAAAAMAAJ
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=QsBVAAAAIBAJ&sjid=iUANAAAAIBAJ&pg=7022,1836881
https://web.archive.org/web/20110706094204/http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/32nd-winners.html
https://books.google.com/books?id=94phColaDxkC
https://books.google.com/books?id=uSPZkqjNvnkC
https://books.google.com/books?id=9UA0AAAAQBAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=vpbuSXSSqdkC
https://books.google.com/books?id=hnodAQAAIAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=V8YlAQAAIAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=2orKHAAACAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=Wj8FywAACAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=B3I54l-8RRQC
https://books.google.com/books?id=sLZ1PHRYe8YC
https://books.google.com/books?id=r3WGAAAAIAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=9pD4p0AJSkgC
https://books.google.com/books?id=vLoYHAAACAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=B5kDHAAACAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=DFXhGtNKh0wC
https://books.google.com/books?id=jhvrSwOOsRgC
https://books.google.com/books?id=KKNW23AYbwQC
https://books.google.com/books?id=OIQumuY6auEC
https://books.google.com/books?id=5I8zfmwEjjUC&pg=PA561
https://books.google.com/books?id=MUKSAAAAQBAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=H3NCIYRRIVUC
https://books.google.com/books?id=23ul0GUNoXIC
https://books.google.com/books?id=ZK-Pe1ackVAC
https://books.google.com/books?id=R0PqObUNlIEC
https://books.google.com/books?id=toTIb1Ek2WwC
https://books.google.com/books?id=a3ZbAAAAMAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=ZgMWAQAAIAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=P_sHAQAAMAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=jY2qkegkhc4C
https://books.google.com/books?id=f6EpAAAACAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=ytrlAgAAQBAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=AC9DO7yanGwC
https://books.google.com/books?id=IZTehB3M1_kC
https://books.google.com/books?id=KFYEhxymCl8C
https://books.google.com/books?id=gzMNAQAAMAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=NQByIjvN8x8C
https://books.google.com/books?id=f4vCQYhKCvcC
https://books.google.com/books?id=pgeG-OhdE5sC
http://www.cinemarealm.com/best-of-cinema/empires-500-greatest-movies-of-all-time/
https://www.comics.org/issue/15318
https://www.amazon.ca/Ben-Hur-Anniversary-Ultimate-Collectors-Edition/dp/B0054RFUTU
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0052618/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/52827
https://stephenboydblog.com/2016/05/11/ben-hur-dell-movie-classic-comic-book-from-1959/
https://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2016/03/16/ben-hur-summers-last-tentpole-gets-a-trailer/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140319001102/http://reviews.cnet.com/2300-6482_7-10000620-5.html
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/benhur
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/ben-hur-1959
https://archive.org/details/burtlancasterame00bufo
https://archive.org/details/paradesgoneby0000brow
https://archive.org/details/shipsseamanshipi0000cass
https://archive.org/details/teenagersteenpic0000dohe_t5s4
https://archive.org/details/americasfilmlega0000eaga
https://archive.org/details/speedofsoundholl00eyma
https://archive.org/details/warningshadowsho0000gidd
https://archive.org/details/manwhoinventedro00hofl
https://archive.org/details/gorevidalbiograp00kapl
https://archive.org/details/newhollywoodfrom0000kram
https://archive.org/details/williamwylerauth00mads
https://archive.org/details/magillssurveyofc02magi
https://archive.org/details/timeoutfilmguide00john_0
https://archive.org/details/frommycolddeadha00emil
https://archive.org/details/greatmoviedirect0000senn
https://archive.org/details/ancientworldin00solo
https://archive.org/details/filmfacts00cobb_mc3
https://www.loc.gov/static/programs/national-film-preservation-board/documents/ben_hur.pdf
https://books.google.com/books?id=Wz8EAAAAMBAJ&q=%22Ben-Hur%22%20eighteen%20chariots&pg=PA71
https://books.google.com/books?id=wVmtloSHqXkC&q=What%20Ifs?%20Of%20American%20History
https://books.google.com/books?id=32gPTvDhLAMC
https://books.google.com/books?id=MzACShdrWBMC
https://books.google.com/books?id=qVaSPwAACAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=clPmzY4YNNYC
https://books.google.com/books?id=8iw-OlGJsJ8C
https://books.google.com/books?id=DTUw1SDQECoC
https://books.google.com/books?id=jS08AAAACAAJ
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v4794
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/benhur/reviews
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/11/19/archives/notables-at-premiere-skouras-warner-zukor-and-balaban-attend-benhur.html
https://archive.org/details/variety220-1960-09/page/n3/mode/2up
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/11/19/archives/the-screen-benhur-a-blockbuster-mgm-spectacle-opens-at-the-loews.html
https://www.newspapers.com/clip/82998850/philip-k-scheuers-review-of-ben-hur/
https://www.newspapers.com/clip/82999069/philip-k-scheuers-review-of-ben-hur/
https://variety.com/1959/film/reviews/ben-hur-2-1200419494/
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1959/12/05/the-childrens-hours
https://www.goldenglobes.com/winners-nominees/1960
https://awards.bafta.org/award/1960/film
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/12/29/archives/benhur-stewart-audrey-hepburn-cited-by-critics-mgm-movie-voted-best.html
https://worldradiohistory.com/Archive-BC/BC-1976/1976-11-15-BC.pdf
https://www.nytimes.com/2005/09/13/movies/new-dvds.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2002/01/04/movies/home-video-old-favorites-in-a-new-format.html
https://archive.nytimes.com/query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage-9C03E6D8173CF93BA2575AC0A9679D8B63.html
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/2761/enwp
https://www.express.co.uk/entertainment/films/616116/China-bans-ghost-movies-Hollywood-fear-sales-slump-censorship-Crimson-peak
https://www.bbc.com/culture/article/20140707-nine-films-that-were-banned
https://web.archive.org/web/20181113165841/https://stephenboydblog.com/2016/05/11/ben-hur-dell-movie-classic-comic-book-from-1959/
https://catalog.afi.com/Film/52827-BEN-HUR
https://faroutmagazine.co.uk/akira-kurosawa-100-favourite-films-list/
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0458-3035
https://books.google.com/books?id=hWMEAAAAMBAJ&q=%22Gore+Vidal%22+%22Ben-Hur%22+homosexual+subtext&pg=PT67
https://books.google.com/books?id=blIEAAAAMBAJ&q=%22Burt+Lancaster%22+%22Ben-Hur%22+violence&pg=PA85
https://books.google.com/books?id=TggEAAAAMBAJ&q=%22Ben-hur%22+score+%22Miklos+Rosza%22&pg=PA19
https://books.google.com/books?id=RAoEAAAAMBAJ&q=%22Ben-Hur%22+%22Lion+Records%22&pg=PA24
https://books.google.com/books?id=RVUEAAAAMBAJ&q=%22Ben-Hur%22+chariot+race+%2218+acres%22&pg=PA119
https://books.google.com/books?id=deq3xI8OmCkC
https://www.ign.com/articles/2002/10/29/ben-hur-first-look
https://web.archive.org/web/20040216053054/http://ps2.ign.com/articles/375/375804p1.html
https://www.jeuxvideo.com/articles/0000/00002828_test.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20040218124726/https://www.jeuxvideo.com/articles/0000/00002828_test.htm
https://variety.com/2019/artisans/awards/ben-hur-charlton-heston-1203430244/
https://www.independent.ie/entertainment/movies/film-ben-hur-the-epic-that-broke-the-mould/31197828.html
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q180098#identifiers
https://viaf.org/viaf/293448801
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4381439-6
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007371893605171
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no2008182775
https://musicbrainz.org/work/6a934754-d7a7-4662-9cb1-c6d24536b75c
https://www.bbfc.co.uk/release/ben-hur-film-qxnzzxq6vlgtntgwodgw
https://www.loc.gov/item/prn-04-215/films-added-to-national-film-registry-for-2004/2004-12-28/
https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://www.claudeheater.com/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191229054513/http://westernboothill.blogspot.com/2017/06/rip-jose-greci.html
https://westernboothill.blogspot.com/2017/06/rip-jose-greci.html
https://www.americanantiquarian.org/proceedings/44525121.pdf
https://www.americanantiquarian.org/proceedings/44517778.pdf
https://www.minneapolisfed.org/about-us/monetary-policy/inflation-calculator/consumer-price-index-1800-
https://archive.org/details/sim_variety_1972-12-13_269_5/page/26/mode/1up
https://web.archive.org/web/20180119120708/https://www.goldenglobes.com/winners-nominees/1960
https://www.nytimes.com/1952/12/08/archives/-ben-hur-to-ride-for-metro-again-new-version-of-silent-classic-will.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1953/10/08/archives/metro-to-produce-18-films-in-5354-changes-in-cast-assignments-also.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1953/11/04/archives/bank-of-america-wins-movie-suit-permitted-by-us-to-foreclose.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1954/12/05/archives/hollywood-dossier-new-market-analysis-is-set-up-other-items.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1955/09/10/archives/six-books-bought-fox-for-films-purchase-from-the-feldman-group.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/06/17/archives/sidney-franklin-resigns-at-mgm-directorproducer-at-studio-since.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/11/26/archives/metro-stills-leo-for-the-first-time-famous-roaring-lion-kept-silent.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1957/02/05/archives/wyler-weighs-offer.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1957/04/07/archives/tour-around-the-lot.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/01/04/archives/debbie-reynolds-is-cast-by-mgm-studio-acquires-comedy-to-be-filmed.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/01/23/archives/heston-will-star-in-mgm-benhur-shooting-proceeds-at-studio-before.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/04/14/archives/goetz-to-produce-3-columbia-films-independent-extends-studio.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/08/04/archives/frenke-signs-pact-with-seven-arts-producers-first-film-to-be.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/07/18/archives/seven-arts-unit-joins-paramount-independent-company-plans-two-films.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/04/04/archives/seven-arts-group-teaming-with-ua-film-company-negotiating-financing.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/03/22/archives/observations-on-the-italian-screen-scene.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/01/12/archives/hollywoods-varied-vistas.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/10/07/archives/-benhur-to-race-for-213-minutes-film-will-be-third-longest-shown.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/03/15/archives/hollywood-views-extras-negotiate-for-pay-increases-exotic-location.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/03/16/movies/home-video-all-of-ben-hur-and-its-secrets.html
https://www.latimes.com/entertainment/la-xpm-1996-06-17-la-et-me-gore-vidal-charlton-heston-archive-story.html
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0024-3019
https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/packages/html/movies/bestpictures/ben-ar.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/02/16/archives/viewed-on-the-bustling-italian-film-scene-toto-fernandel-make-debut.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/10/29/archives/benhur-credit-is-urged-for-fry-wyler-films-director-says-playwright.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1959/01/11/archives/answer-to-a-question-quo-vadis-benhur-vast-unit-breaks-camp-on.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2004/12/29/arts/arts-briefly.html
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0001-8996
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0006-2510
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/03/12/archives/libya-cancels-us-film-permit-will-not-allow-mgm-to-shoot-ben-hur.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1958/06/08/archives/israel-screen-scene-producers-tackle-assortment-of-new-projects.html
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q180098#P345
