Blossoms in the Dust
Blossoms in the Dust is a 1941 American biographical film directed by Mervyn LeRoy and starring Greer Garson, Walter Pidgeon, Felix Bressart, Marsha Hunt, Fay Holden and Samuel S. Hinds. It tells the story of Edna Gladney, who helped orphaned children find homes and began a campaign to remove the word "illegitimate" from Texas birth certificates, despite the opposition of "good" citizens. The screenplay was by Anita Loos, with a story by Ralph Wheelwright. Some of the important aspects of her life fictionalized in the film are the fact that it was Edna herself who was born out of wedlock; she and Sam eloped on the eve of her marriage to someone else, and they had much more time together before his death (26 years)  than given them in the film. (See the Wikipedia article.)
The film is a fictionalized telling of the story of Edna Gladney, an early advocate for the rights of "illegitimate" children in Texas and was one of the biggest hits of 1941 for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and began the rise of Greer Garson as one of the largest stars of the decade. Blossoms in the Dust won an Oscar for Best Art Direction-Interior Decoration, Color, and was nominated for Best Actress in a Leading Role (Garson), Best Cinematography, Color, and Best Picture.


== Plot ==
Edna Kahly and her adopted sister Charlotte are both to be married. However, when Charlotte's mother-in-law-to-be discovers that Charlotte was a foundling, she declares the wedding must not occur, and Charlotte kills herself from shame.  Meanwhile, Edna falls for Sam Gladney, a brash cashier at a bank, and eventually marries him and moves with him to his home state of Texas.
Sam Gladney has a flour mill in Sherman, Texas, and at first, the couple has an idyllic life, though after a difficult delivery Sam is told Edna must have no more children. Several years later, their son dies, and Sam's effort to ease the pain she still endures by trying to get her to adopt a foundling fails. However, the little girl's story touches Edna's heart, and she starts a day care center for the children of working women.
Sam's business fails, and they must auction off all their possessions. The local women take over the day care center, and Sam and Edna move to Fort Worth, Texas, where he runs a mill. Edna starts a home for orphans and extramarital children, and works hard to find them appropriate homes, matching parents to child by interests and inclinations. Sam becomes ill and dies. When a young woman comes to try to donate a large sum of money, Edna worms the young woman's story out of her, and discovers she is in a similar situation as poor Charlotte. After insisting the girl's fiancé won't care that her parents weren't married, she decides to campaign to have the word "illegitimate" removed from Texas birth certificates.
After succeeding in her quest, Edna faces one more trial—the little crippled boy Tony she raised from an infant and nursed back to health, finds a new home at last. She is reluctant to let him go, but as she takes in two new foundlings, brought to her door by a policeman, she at last realizes it is for the best.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
The film was directed by Mervyn LeRoy and produced by Irving Asher. Anita Loos wrote the screenplay, and Ralph Wheelwright the story. Mildred Cram, Dorothy Yost and Hugo Butler made uncredited contributions to the script.


== Reception ==
When the film premiered at Radio City Music Hall, Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote "There is a shade too much of shining nobility in this film, too often tiny fingers tug deliberately on the heartstrings. And the dramatic continuity seems less spontaneous than contrived. The career of Mrs. Gladney is drawn out over a tedious stretch of time. But it is an affecting story and one which commands great respect ... As pure inspirational drama with a pleasant flavor of romance, 'Blossoms in the Dust' should reach a great many hearts."Variety called the film "a worthy production on which much care has been showered by Mervyn LeRoy and others, but it is questionable as to draft. Though meritorious as to production value, cast and background, plus being in color, the picture fails to impress as being big." The review also called the film "a trifle over-done on occasion."Film Daily wrote "Mervyn LeRoy is at his directorial best here, and makes the most of the fine screenplay fashioned by Anita Loos ... Greer Garson's performance is rousing, and that of Walter Pidgeon, as her husband, as inspiring as will be found in any '40-'41 picture."John Mosher of The New Yorker wrote "The subject matter receives very conventional treatment of the inspirational order, with an occasional tear, and, of course, a sad smile here and there."Blossoms in the Dust placed tenth on Film Daily's year-end poll of 548 critics naming the best films of 1941.


== Academy Awards ==
WinsBest Art Direction (Color): Art Direction: Cedric Gibbons, Urie McCleary; Interior Decoration: Edwin B. WillisNominationsOutstanding Motion Picture: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Best Actress: Greer Garson
Best Cinematography (Color): Karl Freund, W. Howard Greene


== Box office ==
According to MGM records, the film earned $1,272,000 in the U.S. and Canada and $1,386,000 elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $552,000.


== References ==


== External links ==

Blossoms in the Dust at IMDb 
Blossoms in the Dust at AllMovie
Blossoms in the Dust at the TCM Movie Database
Blossoms in the Dust at Turner Classic Moves Spotlight
Blossoms in the Dust at the American Film Institute Catalog
Blossoms in the Dust at Rotten TomatoesAFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Daughter of the Poor
A Majority of One (film)
A Tree Grows in Brooklyn (1945 film)
A Virtuous Vamp
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
AllMovie
American Aristocracy
Anita Loos
Another Thin Man
Anthony Adverse
Any Number Can Play
Babes in Arms (film)
Big City Blues (1932 film)
Billy's Rival
Blondie of the Follies
Bosley Crowther
Broadminded (film)
Broadway Babies
But Gentlemen Marry Brunettes
Cecil Cunningham
Cedric Gibbons
Charles Arnt
Chéri (play)
Clinton Rosemond
Desire Me
Dorothy Yost
East Side, West Side (1949 film)
Edna Gladney
Edwin B. Willis
Elmer, the Great
Escape (1940 film)
Fay Holden
Felix Bressart
Film Daily
Five Star Final
Flying Romeos
Fools for Scandal
Gentleman's Fate
Gentlemen Marry Brunettes
Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1928 film)
Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953 film)
Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (musical)
Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (novel)
George Lessey
Gigi (play)
Gold Diggers of 1933
Greer Garson
Gypsy (1962 film)
Happiness Ahead (1934 film)
Happy Birthday (play)
Hard to Handle (film)
Harold Teen (1928 film)
Heat Lightning (film)
Henry O'Neill
Herbert Stothart
Hi Nellie!
High Pressure (film)
His Picture in the Papers
Hold Your Man
Home Before Dark (film)
Homecoming (1948 film)
Hot Stuff (1929 film)
Hugo Butler
IMDb (identifier)
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
I Found Stella Parish
I Married an Angel
Intolerance (film)
Irving Asher
John Eldredge (actor)
John Mosher (writer)
Johnny Eager
Karl Freund
Kathleen Howard
Latin Lovers (1953 film)
Let's Get a Divorce
Little Caesar (film)
Little Johnny Jones (1929 film)
Little Women (1949 film)
Local Boy Makes Good
Loews Cineplex Entertainment
Lovely to Look At
Macbeth (1916 film)
Madame Curie (film)
Mama's Affair (1921 film)
Marc Lawrence
Marsha Hunt (actress, born 1917)
Mary, Mary (film)
Mervyn LeRoy
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Midnight Mary
Mildred Cram
Million Dollar Mermaid
Mister Roberts (1955 film)
Moment to Moment
My Baby (film)
Naughty Baby (film)
Nell's Eugenic Wedding
No Place to Go (1927 film)
No Time for Sergeants (film)
Numbered Men
Oh, Kay! (film)
Oil for the Lamps of China (film)
Page Miss Glory (1935 film)
Personal life
Playing Around
Producers' Showcase
Quo Vadis (1951 film)
Ralph Wheelwright
Random Harvest (film)
Reaching for the Moon (1917 film)
Red-Headed Woman
Red Hot Romance
Riffraff (1936 film)
Rose Marie (1954 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Samuel S. Hinds
San Francisco (1936 film)
Saratoga (film)
Showgirl in Hollywood
Stranded (1916 drama film)
Strange Cargo (1940 film)
Strange Lady in Town
Susan and God
Sweet Adeline (1934 film)
Technicolor
The Americano (1916 film)
The Bad Seed (1956 film)
The Barbarian (1933 film)
The Branded Woman
The Cat and the Fiddle (film)
The Children Pay
The Cowboy and the Lady (1938 film)
The Devil at 4 O'Clock
The FBI Story
The Girl from Missouri
The Girl in the Shack
The Green Berets (film)
The Heart of New York (film)
The House I Live In (1945 film)
The Hunchback (1914 film)
The Isle of Conquest
The King and the Chorus Girl
The Lost House
The Mistake (film)
The Musketeers of Pig Alley
The Mystery of the Leaping Fish
The New York Hat
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Sisters (1914 film)
The Struggle (1931 film)
The Telephone Girl and the Lady
The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)
The Women (1939 film)
The World Changes
Theresa Harris
They Met in Bombay
They Won't Forget
Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo
Three Men on a Horse (film)
Three on a Match
Tonight or Never (1931 film)
Too Young to Marry (1931 film)
Top Speed (film)
Toward the Unknown
Tugboat Annie
Turner Classic Movies
Two Seconds
Unholy Partners
Urie McCleary
Variety (magazine)
W. Howard Greene
Wake Me When It's Over (film)
Walter Pidgeon
Waterloo Bridge (1940 film)
When Ladies Meet (1941 film)
Wild and Woolly (1917 film)
William Henry (actor)
Without Reservations
Woman's Place
http://www.tcm.com/thismonth/article.jsp?cid=74636
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1942
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9B05E1DA153FE13BBC4F51DFB066838A659EDE
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/6209/Blossoms-in-the-Dust/awards
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v6209
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0033407/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/26626
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/blossoms_in_the_dust
https://web.archive.org/web/20121017202502/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/6209/Blossoms-in-the-Dust/awards
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/55/enwp
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q887227#P345
