Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Bohemian Rhapsody is a 2018 biographical musical drama film that focuses on the life of Freddie Mercury, the lead singer of the British rock band Queen, from the formation of the band in 1970 to their 1985 Live Aid performance at the original Wembley Stadium. It was directed by Bryan Singer from a screenplay by Anthony McCarten, and produced by Graham King and Queen manager Jim Beach. It stars Rami Malek as Mercury, with Lucy Boynton, Gwilym Lee, Ben Hardy, Joe Mazzello, Aidan Gillen, Tom Hollander, and Mike Myers in supporting roles. Queen members Brian May and Roger Taylor also served as consultants. A British-American venture, it was produced by Regency Enterprises, GK Films and Queen Films, and was distributed by 20th Century Fox.
Bohemian Rhapsody was announced in 2010, with Sacha Baron Cohen set to play Mercury. After he left the project in 2013 following creative differences with producers, the project languished for several years before Malek was cast in November 2016. Singer served as director through most of principal photography, which began in London in September 2017, but was fired in December 2017 due to frequent absences and clashes with the cast and crew. Dexter Fletcher, who was originally set to direct when the project was early in development, was hired to complete the film; Singer retained sole director credit as per Directors Guild of America guidelines, while Fletcher received an executive producer credit. Filming concluded in January 2018. It is the final film to date to be directed by Singer.
The film was released in the United Kingdom on 24 October 2018 and in the United States on 2 November 2018, to mixed reviews. While the musical sequences and Malek's performance were particularly praised, Singer's direction, the film's portrayal of Mercury and other personnel, and its use of creative licence were criticized. It was well received by audiences and became a major box office success, grossing over $910.8 million worldwide on a production budget of about $50 million, becoming the sixth-highest-grossing film of 2018 worldwide and setting the all-time box office records for the biographical and drama genres. Bohemian Rhapsody received numerous accolades, including a leading four wins at the 91st Academy Awards for Best Actor (Malek), Best Film Editing, Best Sound Editing and Best Sound Mixing; it was also nominated for Best Picture. The film also won Best Motion Picture – Drama at the 76th Golden Globe Awards, and was nominated for the Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture and BAFTA Award for Best British Film, while Malek won the Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild and BAFTA for Best Actor.


== Plot ==
In 1985, Queen, wait to perform at Live Aid. Fifteen years earlier, in 1970, Farrokh "Freddie" Bulsara works as a baggage handler at Heathrow Airport and lives with his parents and sister. He goes to a pub to see a local band Smile perform. Seeking them out after the show, he meets and is attracted to Mary Austin, who works at the boutique Biba. He finds drummer Roger Taylor and guitarist Brian May and learns that their lead singer has just quit the band. Farrokh offers himself as a replacement and impresses them with his vocal ability. Farrokh seeks out Mary at Biba and they start dating. The band plays gigs across Britain with Farrokh as the lead singer and a new bassist, John Deacon. Farrokh pushes them to think bigger and sells their van to finance a record album. As the band records, an A&R rep from EMI asks engineer Roy Thomas Baker for demos.
Farrokh changes his name to Freddie Mercury and renames the band Queen. They sign with John Reid, who books the band an American tour. Paul Prenter, who is attracted to Freddie, manages their daily schedule. An appearance on Top of the Pops gives Queen their first hit, "Killer Queen". Freddie proposes to Mary but begins questioning his sexuality. In 1975, Queen record their fourth studio album, A Night at the Opera, placing extensive effort into recording Freddie's magnum opus, "Bohemian Rhapsody". However, they quit EMI when executive Ray Foster refuses to release it as the album's lead single. Freddie conspires with radio DJ Kenny Everett to debut the song on his program. Despite critical pans, "Bohemian Rhapsody" becomes a global hit, launching Queen to international superstardom. Following a world tour, Freddie begins an affair with Paul and comes out to Mary as bisexual. She counters that he is gay and they call off the engagement but remain close friends.
The band's success continues into the early 1980s with the songs "We Will Rock You" and "Another One Bites the Dust", but tensions arise over Paul's negative influence on Freddie. At a lavish party at his home, Freddie is attracted to a waiter, Jim Hutton, who tells Freddie to find him when he learns self-acceptance. Paul encourages Reid to persuade Freddie to go solo, but when the idea offends Freddie, Paul feigns ignorance and Freddie fires Reid without consulting the band. Afterwards, Queen's lawyer, Jim "Miami" Beach, takes over management. In 1982, during a press conference about the band's album Hot Space, the press bombards Freddie with questions about his sexuality.
Freddie's relationship with the band further deteriorates after the campy music video for "I Want to Break Free", where the band appears in drag, backfires and he signs a $4-million solo deal with CBS Records, effectively breaking up the band. He records his 1984 solo album Mr. Bad Guy in Munich and engages in drugs and gay orgies with Paul, but starts to feel unwell. Mary, now married and pregnant, visits unexpectedly and urges him to return to Queen and participate in the benefit concert Live Aid. Realizing that Paul withheld news of Live Aid from him and has been a corrosive influence, Freddie fires him. In retaliation, Paul goes public about Freddie's sexual escapades.
Freddie returns to London to reconcile with the band and persuade them to play at Live Aid as a last-minute addition. He learns that he has AIDS and reveals his condition to the band, but brushes off their sympathy, wishing to focus on performing and making music for however long he has left. The band embraces in solidarity. On the day of Live Aid, Freddie reconnects with Jim Hutton, Mary, and his family, and heeds his father's Zoroastrian maxim, "Good thoughts, good words, good deeds". Freddie and the band are in top form at Live Aid, performing several hits including "Bohemian Rhapsody", "Radio Ga Ga", and "We Are the Champions", and helping to increase donations. 
A series of intertitles recount Freddie's final years. He remained friends with Mary and was in a loving relationship with Jim until his death in 1991 at age 45, after which Queen established the Mercury Phoenix Trust.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Plans for a film about Queen were revealed in September 2010 by the band's guitarist Brian May. Covering the period up to Live Aid in 1985, the film was to feature Sacha Baron Cohen as Freddie Mercury, with Graham King to co-produce, and Peter Morgan to write the screenplay. May confirmed in April 2011 that the production was moving forward. He approved of Baron Cohen as Mercury but had reservations about the project's possible direction. The band's concerns focused on avoiding any harm to Mercury's legacy.In July 2013, Baron Cohen left the project due to creative differences. Allegedly, he had wanted a "gritty R-rated tell-all" focused on Mercury, while the band hoped for a PG-rated film about the band. May said later in 2013 that Baron Cohen had left the project on good terms. Comments by May and Roger Taylor suggested that Baron Cohen was too well known as a comedian and prankster (due largely to his fictional personae Ali G and Borat), and that his presence in the film would be distracting. In March 2016, Baron Cohen spoke about misunderstandings with Queen about the subject and events of the film, in particular, whether the story ought to continue past Mercury's 1991 death. He also mentioned artistic disagreements with the band over the composition of the production team, referring specifically to Cohen recruiting Morgan, David Fincher, and Tom Hooper.Following Baron Cohen's departure, in December 2013, Ben Whishaw was mentioned as a possible replacement to play Mercury. Also at this time, Dexter Fletcher was selected as the film's director. Fletcher removed himself from the project early the following year, amid reports of creative disagreements with King. In August 2014, Whishaw suggested that the film was not progressing well and that there had been scripting problems. Whishaw left the project seven months later. Rumours followed in 2015 that Baron Cohen had rejoined the project, or that Whishaw might return.In November 2015, screenwriter Anthony McCarten became attached to the project, which now had the working title of Bohemian Rhapsody after Queen's song of the same name. Developing a fresh take on the story from his interviews with May and Taylor, he delivered his first draft in February 2016. A year later, Bryan Singer was in talks to take over as director, Rami Malek was cast as Mercury, and the film was fast-tracked by 20th Century Fox and New Regency. It was reported in 2015 that Johnny Flynn was due to play Roger Taylor and that Gemma Arterton would play Mercury's partner Mary Austin.In May 2017, Malek confirmed that he had conducted recordings at Abbey Road Studios and had consulted Taylor and May. The same month, Entertainment Weekly reported that Taylor and May were serving as music producers. In August 2017, Justin Haythe was revealed to have penned another draft of the script.


=== Casting ===
On 4 November 2016, it was announced that Rami Malek would star as Freddie Mercury, after the producers saw his work in Mr. Robot. He had to make a pre-recording at Abbey Road Studios, which was sent to Queen members for approval. On 21 August 2017, additional cast members were announced: Ben Hardy as drummer Roger Taylor, Gwilym Lee as lead guitarist Brian May, and Joseph Mazzello as bass guitarist John Deacon. On 30 August 2017, it was reported that Allen Leech had been cast in the film to play Mercury's personal manager, Paul Prenter, who worked for him from 1977 to 1987, when he was fired for betraying Mercury by selling his personal information to UK newspapers.On 6 September 2017, Lucy Boynton was cast to play Mercury's long-term girlfriend, Mary Austin. Lindsey Stirling, Bryce Dallas Howard, Maria Bello and Ashley Johnson were also considered. On 11 September 2017, Mike Myers joined the cast to play EMI executive Ray Foster, and on 22 September 2017, Aaron McCusker was added to play Mercury's long-term boyfriend Jim Hutton. On 26 September 2017, it was announced that Aidan Gillen had been cast as John Reid, Queen's second manager, from 1975 to 1978, who took over from Norman Sheffield of Trident Studios; while Tom Hollander was set to play Jim Beach, Queen's third manager, who took over from John Reid in 1978. The film includes cameos by current Queen vocalist Adam Lambert as a truck driver and the film's editor John Ottman as a live TV director. Luke Deacon, son of John Deacon, also makes a cameo appearance as a college student, attending the pub where Smile plays.


=== Filming ===
Pre-production began in July 2017 in the United Kingdom, with principal photography commencing in London in September 2017. Queen archivist Greg Brooks was instrumental in helping recreate each scene to make it as true to life as possible. He worked daily with Fox for months from the beginning, providing answers to questions. There were about a hundred extras, who were all individually scanned 360° and digitally replicated to imitate a larger crowd. The entire Live Aid performance was filmed on a giant set at the former airfield RAF Bovingdon, but in the final cut "We Will Rock You" and "Crazy Little Thing Called Love" were cut out.When Malek was contacted about playing Mercury, he had only a casual knowledge of Queen. To embody Mercury, Malek had to work many intense sessions with a movement coach (as well as learn to talk with prosthetic teeth). Malek's protruding teeth were crafted by artist Chris Lyons. Besides examining Mercury's movements, they also watched footage of Liza Minnelli, who was an inspiration to Mercury's stage moves. Malek took singing and piano lessons and had an accent coach. He said, "I had to re-create things he did on the fly, onstage. There were many days I said to myself, 'This is a lost cause.'" After finishing the film, Malek said that he became a "Queen super-fan", specifying, "I see Freddie as the best performer of all time... I never ceased to be astonished by this man." While Malek sang some parts in the film, producers inserted vocal stems from Queen songs as well as filling in parts with Canadian vocalist Marc Martel, a winner of the Queen Extravaganza Live Tour auditions.


==== Firing of Singer and his replacement ====
On 1 December 2017, The Hollywood Reporter reported that 20th Century Fox had temporarily halted production due to the "unexpected unavailability" of director Bryan Singer. Sources said that Singer had not returned to the set after the Thanksgiving week (20–26 November). Discussions began about replacing him. Cinematographer Newton Thomas Sigel stepped in to direct during Singer's non-showings. Singer's absence was reportedly due to "a personal health matter concerning Bryan and his family". With under three weeks left on the shoot, Singer requested a filming hiatus as his mother was extremely ill. Other sources claimed that Malek and the crew had grown tired of Singer's behaviour, who was reportedly arriving late to set and clashing with Malek. Tom Hollander briefly quit the film over issues with Singer but was convinced to return. On 4 December 2017, Singer was fired as director, with about two weeks of scheduled principal photography remaining.On 6 December 2017, Dexter Fletcher was announced as Singer's replacement and on 15 December, filming resumed with Fletcher directing. Fletcher later estimated that two-thirds of the principal photography had been completed when he joined the production, saying, "I came into the last few weeks of principal photography and editing and the bits and pieces like that... I was looking at two complete [acts] in a good film, and [I had to] not let it down."On 30 January 2018, Gwilym Lee posted to social media that filming had finished. Visual effects were provided by DNEG and supervised by Paul Norris.


==== Directing credit ====
According to the Directors Guild of America, only one director can be named for a film, and the DGA has sole control over who that will be. Although Fletcher replaced Singer with two weeks left in the production, Singer had hired the cast, crew and shot most of the film. Producer Graham King announced in June 2018 that Singer would receive the directing credit on the finished film. Fletcher received an executive producer credit.


=== Music ===

John Ottman, a frequent collaborator of Singer, edited the film's soundtrack. The film lacks an original underscore, deviating from previous Singer-Ottman collaborations on which the latter has also served as composer. An official soundtrack album was released by Hollywood Records and Virgin EMI Records on CD, cassette and digital formats on 19 October 2018. The album contains several Queen hits and 11 previously unreleased recordings, including five tracks from their 21-minute Live Aid performance in July 1985, which have never before been released in audio form. Vinyl releases (including a picture disc bundle) followed in February and April 2019. The soundtrack became the sixth-best-selling album of 2019.


== Release ==
The world premiere of Bohemian Rhapsody took place in London at Wembley Arena, on 23 October 2018. It was released in the United Kingdom on 24 October 2018 in IMAX, and in the United States on 2 November 2018, by 20th Century Fox. The film had previously been scheduled for release on 25 December 2018.
In November 2018, John Ottman announced in an interview that an extended version of the film with cut-out scenes may be released, in a yet unknown format. 
On 1 January 2019, it was announced that there would be special sing-along screenings simultaneously in cinemas across the United Kingdom with the first screening at Leicester Square's Prince Charles Cinema with others on 11 January 2019. There were also many sing-along screenings in South Korea and Japan.In China, the film had a limited release on 22 March 2019. Three minutes of the film was censored, including scenes depicting drugs and homosexuality. Part of Rami Malek's Oscar speech, where he referred to Freddie Mercury as "a gay man, an immigrant," was also censored in China.In Egypt, the film was subjected to several cuts before it was permitted to be screened. As Rami Malek is of Egyptian descent, his Oscar win for his portrayal of Freddie Mercury drew congratulations from Egyptian media and government figures. However, Neela Ghoshal of Human Rights Watch stated that the country deserved "an Oscar for hypocrisy" given its prohibition on homosexuals appearing in the media. Member of Parliament Mohamed Ismail criticised Malek's win, stating: "He is trying to [spread] homosexuality among the youth... The award has a specific goal, which is to corrupt morality in the Arab world. Rami Malek is a bad example. If he was in Egypt, he would have been hanged."


=== Home media ===
20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film in the United States on DVD, Blu-ray and Ultra HD Blu-ray on 19 February 2019; with a digital version released 22 January. The UK digital release was scheduled for 23 February 2019, with DVD and Blu-ray/4K Ultra HD on 18 March 2019. The home release includes an extended version of the Live Aid sequence, a 16-minute featurette, a 22-minute documentary, and trailers.In the United Kingdom, it surpassed Avengers: Infinity War to become the fastest-selling digital download film of all time, selling 265,000 downloads in eight days. It also set the record for the biggest debut on physical disc formats, selling 465,000 discs in its first week. It went on to sell 853,000 units in four weeks, including 388,600 digital sales.In the United States, 73% of unit sales in the first week were on Blu-ray Disc, with 13% from the 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray version. Home video sales in the United States and Canada are estimated to have generated over $49.6 million as of 6 December 2019, including $19,333,115 in DVD sales and $41,562,971 in Blu-ray sales.


=== Marketing ===
The first trailer for the film was released on 15 May 2018 and with more than 5 million views in the first 24 hours, it was the top trending video on YouTube. Television writer and producer Bryan Fuller argued that the trailer favours Mercury's relationship with women as opposed to men, and also highlighted the absence of the singer's AIDS diagnosis from the synopsis. Instead, it is simply referred to as "a life-threatening illness". Executives stated that the film would acknowledge Mercury's gay relationships. With the release of the trailer, Queen reached three of the top 20 positions on the Billboard Hot Rock Songs chart: "Bohemian Rhapsody", "Another One Bites the Dust" and "We Are the Champions". In total, the studio spent $121 million promoting the film.On 11 June 2018, at CineEurope in Barcelona, an early showing of the film closed the show, with appearances by Rami Malek and producer Graham King and special appearances by Brian May and Roger Taylor, who were playing a concert of Queen + Adam Lambert in Barcelona.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Bohemian Rhapsody grossed $216.7 million in the United States and Canada, and $694.1 million in other territories, for a total worldwide gross of $910.8 million, against a production budget of about $52 million.On 11 November, it surpassed Straight Outta Compton ($201.6 million) to become the highest-grossing musical biopic of all-time worldwide. Bohemian Rhapsody went on to set box office records for the highest-grossing biographical film of all time, and the highest-grossing LGBT film. It also set the record for the highest-grossing conventional drama film (it was surpassed by Joker one year later). It is Fox's fourth highest-grossing film, and their fifth highest outside of North America.Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $350.8 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenue, making it the fourth most profitable release of 2018. However, in November 2021, after McCarten sued producer Graham King over lack of payments, it was revealed 20th Century Fox wrote down the film as a $51 million loss, an act attributed to Hollywood accounting.


==== United Kingdom ====
In the United Kingdom, the film had preview screenings on its opening night of 24 October 2018, grossing £1.62 million ($2.22 million) from 575 venues, with a per-screen average of £2,817 ($3,859). It went on to gross $12.5 million from 1,250 screens in its opening weekend, finishing first at the box office. It grossed another $7.4 million in its second weekend, remaining at number-one and grossing £20.4 million ($27.95 million) through 12 days.


==== United States and Canada ====
In the United States and Canada, Bohemian Rhapsody was released alongside The Nutcracker and the Four Realms and Nobody's Fool, and was originally projected to gross $26–30 million in its opening weekend. By the week of its release, weekend estimates had reached $35–40 million. It made $18.4 million on its first day, including $3.9 million from Thursday night previews. It went on to debut to $51.1 million, topping the box office and marking the second-best opening for a musical biographical picture, behind Straight Outta Compton ($60.2 million in August 2015). The film made $31.2 million in its second weekend, finishing second, behind newcomer The Grinch, and $15.7 million in its third, finishing behind Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald and The Grinch.In its fourth weekend the film made $13.8 million, and $19.3 million over the five-day Thanksgiving frame, finishing fifth. On 1 December, it passed $162 million at the domestic box office, surpassing Straight Outta Compton as the highest grossing musical biopic in the United States. In its 10th weekend of release the film was added to 199 theatres over the previous week for a total of 1,080, and made $2.4 million. In its 12th weekend of release the film made $2.3 million from 1,117 theatres, crossing the $200 million mark. In the film's 13th week of release, following the announcement of its five Oscar nominations, it was added back to an additional 246 theatres (for a total of 1,423) and made $2.6 million.


==== Other territories ====
In its second weekend of international release, the film topped the worldwide box office, grossing $72.5 million in international markets. New markets included France ($7.7 million), Mexico ($5.8 million), Germany ($5.7 million) and Australia ($5.7 million). By its fourth weekend the film was still holding strong, adding an additional $45.5 million from 78 markets, for a running total of $256.4 million. Through four weekends of international release, the film's largest markets were the UK ($45.3 million, passing La La Land), followed by South Korea ($24.5 million), France ($18.38 million), Australia ($16.8 million) and Mexico ($15.5 million). On 12 December, the film surpassed $433 million at the international box office, becoming the highest-grossing musical biopic ever overseas.The film became the biggest 2018 release in 13 international markets, including Japan ($88.6 million), Italy ($30.5 million) and the Netherlands ($19.3 million), as of 20 January 2019. The film's largest overseas markets were in East Asia, with the largest-grossing market being Japan, where it became the highest-grossing film of 2018. The film crossed 7 million tickets sold and ¥10 billion grossed at the Japanese box office, with the IMAX version crossing ¥1 billion, becoming the highest-grossing IMAX release ever in Japan. It also crossed $115 million there, and is the highest-grossing live-action musical film in Japan, passing Beauty and the Beast (2017). As of 31 March 2019, Bohemian Rhapsody has sold 9,220,250 tickets and grossed ¥12,739,285,680 in Japan.In South Korea, the film debuted at number two at the box office and by the fourth week took over the number one spot. After a short drop for two weeks, the film reclaimed the number one spot in its seventh week, which is a first for a Hollywood film. As the second-largest grossing market outside of North America, the film has amassed $77 million, as of 1 February 2019, and has become the sixth highest-grossing foreign film ever in South Korea, with nearly 10 million tickets sold. It is the most successful musical film ever released in South Korea.The film grossed $29.4 million in Spain, $16.4 million in Russia and $14.4 million in Brazil, as of 3 February 2019. In China, where the film received an art house release after having its content edited, it debuted to $11.6 million, setting the all-time record for a National Alliance of Arthouse Cinemas release.


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 60% based on 419 reviews, and an average rating of 6.1/10. The website's critical consensus reads: "Bohemian Rhapsody hits a handful of high notes, but as an in-depth look at a beloved band, it offers more of a medley than a true greatest hits collection." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 49 out of 100, based on 50 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 88% positive score and a 75% "definite recommend". The critical response to Bohemian Rhapsody made it one of the worst-reviewed films to win a Best Picture award at the Golden Globe Awards (lowest Rotten Tomatoes score since Out of Africa in 1986—60% compared to Bohemian Rhapsody's 62% at the time of the awards), or to be nominated for Best Picture at the Academy Awards (lowest Rotten Tomatoes score since Extremely Loud & Incredibly Close in 2012—46% at the time of the awards).Owen Gleiberman of Variety wrote: "Rami Malek does a commanding job of channeling Freddie Mercury's flamboyant rock-god bravura, but Bryan Singer's middle-of-the-road Queen biopic rarely lives up to the authenticity of its lead performance." Paul Whitington, writing for the Irish Independent, gave the film 3/5 stars, saying: "Bohemian Rhapsody is not big on subtlety: it tells Freddie's story loudly, taking dramatic shortcuts, over-neatly conflating events and reducing most of the surrounding characters to single dimensions. Some of the dialogue's a bit heavy-handed too, but I must say I was thoroughly entertained."For the Evening Standard, Craig McLean wrote: "Bohemian Rhapsody is triumphant entertainment. The post-production special effects have done their job: the Live Aid scenes are convincingly epic. The actors have done their job, too, notably Malek, who oozes pure Mercury." For Time, Stephanie Zacharek wrote: "In strict filmmaking terms, Bohemian Rhapsody is a bit of a mess. Some of its scenes connect awkwardly, and it hits every beat of disaster and triumphs squarely, like a gong. Yet if it has many of the problems we associate with 'bad' movies, it has more ragged energy than so many good ones, largely because of Rami Malek's performance as Mercury, all glitter and muscle and nerve endings." She described it as "a movie for sensualists, not quality-control experts".Chief Guardian pop critic Alexis Petridis described the portrayal of Mercury as "sanitized", writing: "Bohemian Rhapsody is a film that plays so fast and loose with the truth, it ends up seeming faintly ridiculous: you start out nitpicking about minor chronological errors... and end up with your jaw on the floor." Guardian film critic Steve Rose described it as a "rock slog with a troubling moralistic subtext". Although he praised Malek's performance, David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a grade of "D+", criticising Singer's direction and calling the film "royally embarrassing". He wrote: "Queen's music may have been unclassifiable, but their movie is as trite and textbook as it gets." He described the film as a "terrible and self-indulgent piece of revisionist history, where the legend is always prioritized over the truth, even when the truth was surely far more interesting."For The Spectator, Jasper Rees described Bohemian Rhapsody as "a succession of predigested clichés", writing "you are overcome by the sapping impression that almost nothing happened the way it's being presented." He concluded: "The costumes and wigs are splendid, and the songs are still up to snuff. But this homage to a showman is more famine than feast." Olly Richards wrote for Empire that the film was "a safe, competent, decidedly non-scandalous biopic. It treats the life of Freddie Mercury with cautious affection, happy to play within the rules when depicting a man who did anything but." However, he described Malek as "spectacular", concluding: "If the script hits a lot of bum notes, Malek is always perfectly in key." Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote: "In struggling to make a salable PG-13 movie out of an R-rated rock life, Bohemian Rhapsody leaves you feeling that something essential and elemental is missing", but said to put Malek "high on the list for best film performances of 2018," as the actor "digs so deep into the role that we can't believe we're not watching the real thing."Dave Calhoun wrote for Time Out: "It boasts a film-stealing, possessed performance by Rami Malek, who pouts, struts and quips as Mercury, turning the rest of the cast into bit-part players... The movie, though catchy and often seductive, is an act of brazen myth-making. Facts and chronology are tossed aside in favor of a messianic storyline... Much is left out, or fiddled with." He added, "don't expect anything more than a safe gloss over the Queen tale... its attitude toward sex and drugs is coy and uncomfortably close to the small-world thinking it claims to dismiss." Despite calling the film "uneven," Chicago Tribune film critic Katie Walsh stated: "Malek keeps it going with his sheer will and talent." In a negative review, Soumya Srivastava of the Hindustan Times still asserted that the character was "played to a toothy perfection by Rami Malek." Johnny Oleksinski of the New York Post was less impressed with Malek's performance, writing: "It's a surface-level performance — physically galvanizing, but with no substance."The film received criticism for its portrayal of Mercury's gay relationships. Aja Romano wrote for Vox: "Bohemian Rhapsody is a movie that consciously tries to position a gay man at its center while strategically disengaging with the 'gay' part as much as it can, flitting briefly over his emotional and sexual experiences and fixating on his platonic relationship with an ex-girlfriend instead." Likewise, Olly Richards wrote: "There are some poor, strange choices when deciding where to focus, not least committing so much time to his relationship with Mary Austin and virtually none to any happy gay relationship, romantic or otherwise." Owen Gleiberman wrote that the film "treats Freddie's life – his sexual-romantic identity, his loneliness, his reckless adventures in gay leather clubs – with kid-gloves reticence, so that even if the film isn't telling major lies, you don't feel you're fully touching the real story either."Brian May responded to the critical reviews by stating that the "mistake that critics made was reviewing the trailer instead of reviewing the film. They jumped to conclusions. Once people stake their claim, it's hard for them to withdraw." Fraser Nelson, editor of The Spectator, wrote: "Don't believe the critics. If you like Queen's music, see the Queen film," and he likened the critics' negative reaction to the film to the original reaction to the song "Bohemian Rhapsody" and the popular musical We Will Rock You. Also writing for The Spectator, Toby Young described the film's success at the Academy Awards as "a triumph over snobby film critics".


=== Accolades ===

The film, which has received multiple awards and nominations, won four awards at the 91st Academy Awards for Best Actor (Rami Malek), Best Film Editing, Best Sound Editing and Best Sound Mixing, making it the film with the most wins at the ceremony; it was also nominated for Best Picture, which it lost to Green Book. At the 76th Golden Globe Awards, the film was nominated for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama and Best Motion Picture – Drama, winning both. At the 72nd British Academy Film Awards, the film received seven nominations, winning for Best Actor in a Leading Role and Best Sound. The film was also nominated for Best Theatrical Motion Picture at the 30th annual Producers Guild of America Awards, and received an award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role at the 25th Screen Actors Guild Awards.In the wake of the renewed sexual abuse allegations against director Bryan Singer, GLAAD withdrew Bohemian Rhapsody's nomination for the year's GLAAD Media Award in the Outstanding Film – Wide Release category. On 6 February 2019, the British Academy of Film and Television Arts removed Singer's name from Bohemian Rhapsody's nomination for the BAFTA Award for Best British Film.When the film was nominated and won awards for Best Editing, several sequences, in particular the scene where the band first meets John Reid, were criticised online for poor editing and continuity errors. Editor John Ottman, aware of these lapses, explained that they were the result of mixing scenes that had been shot by Singer and Fletcher, as well as in response to the producers' notes and test audience feedback. He wished he could have handled them differently.


== Possible sequel ==
In August 2021, guitarist Brian May revealed that there were ideas being thrown around for a sequel to Bohemian Rhapsody, though it would be a matter of topping the original and could possibly take years to get the screenplay right.


== Historical accuracy ==
The film has been criticized for fictionalizing, exaggerating or rearranging events in the band's career and Mercury's personal life. The visual blog Information Is Beautiful deduced that, while taking creative licence into account, the film was 79.9% accurate when compared to real-life events, calling it "a fairly truthful account represented in a massively compressed [and] edited timeline."


=== Regarding the band ===
The formation of Queen was not as simple as portrayed in the film. Mercury had known Tim Staffell, Smile's lead singer and bassist, from art college, and had expressed interest in joining the band prior to Staffell's departure. Additionally, Smile had more than three members. Mercury also shared a flat with Roger Taylor prior to joining the band, and had run a stall at the Kensington Market with him.
Deacon was not the original bassist, but the fourth.
The character of Foster is fictional, and is loosely based on EMI chief Roy Featherstone. Although Featherstone and others initially refused to release "Bohemian Rhapsody" as a single due to its length, it was eventually released as the lead single from A Night at the Opera by the label due to public demand spurred on by the efforts of Kenny Everett. Queen had in fact been signed with EMI since the release of their debut album in 1973, and remained with the label for the remainder of their career.
Some songs are shown out of chronological order. For example, "We Will Rock You" was written in 1977, not in 1980 as depicted in the film. The band is shown performing "Fat Bottomed Girls" during their first US tour in 1974, but that song was not written until 1978.
Reid was not fired as Queen's manager after an argument with Mercury over his solo career as portrayed in the film. The band and Reid parted amicably in 1978 by mutual agreement and for different reasons.
The Rio de Janeiro concert did not take place in 1979, but during the first Rock in Rio festival in January 1985 (thus approximately six months before Live Aid); the live version for "Love of My Life" used in the film is taken from the 1985 Rio concert, and labelled as such in the accompanying official soundtrack for the film.
The film portrays the band breaking up when Mercury goes solo, but in reality they never split and their Live Aid performance was not a reunion. Mercury's solo debut, Mr. Bad Guy, released in April 1985, was not the first solo project by a Queen member. Prior to this, Taylor had released the single "(I Wanna) Testify" in August 1977, and the albums Fun in Space and Strange Frontier in April 1981 and June 1984, respectively. May had released the EP Star Fleet Project in October 1983.
Queen did not start sharing songwriting credits in 1985 before Live Aid. Their 1986 album A Kind of Magic still had individual writing credits. The only Queen albums which credit the band as a whole are their last, The Miracle (1989) and Innuendo (1991).
Queen were not apprehensive about performing at Live Aid and were not a last-minute addition. They had completed a worldwide tour in support of the album The Works two months before Live Aid. They were "extremely well-rehearsed" for the show and did not have to get back into shape as a band.
Queen performed "Crazy Little Thing Called Love" and "We Will Rock You" at Live Aid, after "Hammer to Fall" and before "We Are the Champions", but this is not shown in the theatrical release of the film. "Radio Ga Ga" and "Hammer to Fall" were also shorter in the film than in the real concert.
In a scene that did not appear in the film but was briefly shown in a trailer, Gwilym Lee as May and Joseph Mazzello as Deacon are seen playing their guitars with a bow, which May himself claims to have never done.


=== Regarding Mercury's personal life ===
The backstory of Mercury's family was not as dramatic as portrayed in the film. The family were not forced to flee their hometown in Zanzibar but had a six-month window move to Middlesex. The film also suggests that Mercury was sent to boarding school because of his behaviour, and portrays his indifference to his Parsi background and decision to change his name as a source of tension with his family. Mercury's mother Jer claimed in a 2012 interview with The Daily Telegraph that Mercury was sent to boarding school in India in hope for a better education; Mercury "kept a strict division between his work and his home all his life", and throughout his upbringing and adulthood was known to be respectful towards his family. May also stated that Mercury's parents were ultimately supportive of the band and would attend Queen's concerts if they were performing nearby. Both Jer and Mercury's sister Kashmira also claimed that while Mercury was not devoutly religious and preferred not to disclose his beliefs with the media, he was proud of his ancestry in private. Although not shown in the film, Mercury's funeral service was conducted in accordance with Zoroastrian customs.
According to Vanity Fair, the film leaves out many details about Mercury's relationships with Austin and Hutton, "tweaking and glossing over precious facts".
Mercury did not meet Austin on the same night he joined the band. Austin had briefly dated May, but did not meet Mercury until he was already a band member.
Hutton was not a server at one of Mercury's parties; he was a hairdresser at the Savoy Hotel who met Mercury at a nightclub. They first met in 1983 and not in 1981, as portrayed in the film.
The film's treatment of Mercury's HIV diagnosis received particular criticism, with Jasper Rees describing it in The Spectator as "the most callous rearrangement of the facts". Mercury was diagnosed with HIV in 1987, two years after Live Aid. Taylor said that the other band members were not made aware of his condition until early 1989.
The portrayal of Paul Prenter was also met with some debate. Both May and Taylor have said that Prenter's partnership with Mercury was a source of friction within Queen. In his book Queen 3-D, May wrote, "He [Prenter] was certainly responsible for leading Freddie off on a different path, and it would be fair to say that we parted on terms that were less than good." Taylor said in the Queen documentary Days of our Lives that "He [Prenter] was a very, very bad influence upon Freddie, hence on the band." However, Prenter's family have said that he and Mercury were never in a relationship; that he was not disowned by his family for his sexuality; and that he did not withhold details concerning Live Aid from Mercury. In real life, Prenter did not work for Reid; he was a former radio DJ who became Mercury's PA in 1977, two years after the release of A Night at the Opera. He also did not disclose details of Mercury's sex life on a German talk show, but in a 1987 interview for The Sun newspaper after he no longer worked for the band. According to Mark Blake's book Is This the Real Life?, Queen roadie Peter Hince claimed that Prenter was fired for holding a party in Mercury's home without permission.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Bohemian Rhapsody at IMDb 
Bohemian Rhapsody at AllMovie
Bohemian Rhapsody at Metacritic 
Bohemian Rhapsody at Rotten Tomatoes
Bohemian Rhapsody at Box Office Mojo
Bohemian Rhapsody on Netflix(I Wanna) Testify
/Film
12 Angry Men (1957 film)
12 Years a Slave (film)
17473 Freddiemercury
1917 (2019 film)
2018 in film
20th Century Fox
20th Century Fox Home Entertainment
25th Screen Actors Guild Awards
360 (film)
72nd British Academy Film Awards
76th Golden Globe Awards
91st Academy Awards
AARP Movies for Grownups Award for Best Ensemble
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Day at the Races (album)
A Day at the Races Tour
A Kind of Magic
A Man and a Woman
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Night at the Hip Hopera
A Night at the Odeon – Hammersmith 1975
A Night at the Opera (Queen album)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
Aaron McCusker
Abbey Road Studios
Absolute Greatest
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound Editing
Academy Award for Best Sound Mixing
Academy Awards
Ace Bhatti
Adam Lambert
Aidan Gillen
Alexis Petridis
Ali G
AllMovie
All the King's Men (1949 film)
Allen Leech
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Sniper
An Officer and a Gentleman
Anne of the Thousand Days
Another One Bites the Dust
Anthony McCarten
Apt Pupil (film)
Arab world
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Ashley Johnson (actress)
At the Beeb (Queen album)
Atonement (2007 film)
Avatar (2009 film)
Avengers: Infinity War
BAFTA
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role
BAFTA Award for Best British Film
BAFTA Award for Best Sound
BBC News
BBC Radio 1
BBC Radio 2
Babel (film)
Back to the Future
Backstage (magazine)
Barcelona (Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé album)
Barcelona (Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé song)
Beauty and the Beast (2017 film)
Becket (1964 film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Ben Hardy (actor)
Ben Whishaw
Benefit concert
Biba
Billboard (magazine)
Billy Elliot
Biographical film
Black Swan (film)
Blu-ray
Blue Ribbon Award for Best Foreign Film
Bob Geldof
Bohemian Rhapsody
Bohemian Rhapsody: The Original Soundtrack
Bohemian Rhapsody (song)
Borat Sagdiyev
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Bowed guitar
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Brian May
British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Board of Film Classification
Brokeback Mountain
Bryan Fuller
Bryan Singer
Bryce Dallas Howard
Bugsy
Camp (style)
Capital London
Censorship in China
Chicago Tribune
Chinatown (1974 film)
CineEurope
CinemaScore
Cirolana mercuryi
Classic Queen
Colditz (2005 TV series)
Columbia Records
Comes out
Conversation Piece (film)
Crazy Little Thing Called Love
Crazy Tour
DNEG
Dagblad van het Noorden
Dancer in the Dark
Dances with Wolves
David Fincher
David McCandless
Deacy Amp
Deadline Hollywood
Dear Rosie
Deep Cuts, Volume 1 (1973–1976)
Deep Cuts, Volume 2 (1977–1982)
Deep Cuts, Volume 3 (1984–1995)
Dermot Murphy (actor)
Development hell
Dexter Fletcher
Die Hard
Directors Guild of America
District 9
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dragon Attack: A Tribute to Queen
Drama (film and television)
Dreamgirls (film)
E!
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
EMI
EMI Records
East of Eden (film)
Eddie the Eagle (film)
Egypt Independent
Egyptian media
Egyptians
Empire (film magazine)
Entertainment Weekly
Evening Standard
Extremely Loud & Incredibly Close (film)
Fandango Media
Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald
Fat Bottomed Girls
Field of Dreams
Five Live (George Michael and Queen EP)
Flags of Our Fathers (film)
Flash Gordon (soundtrack)
Flashdance
Forbes
Forbidden Games
Forrest Gump
Fraser Nelson
Freddie Mercury
Freddie Mercury: The Great Pretender
Freddie Mercury discography
Frost/Nixon (film)
Frost/Nixon (play)
Frozen (2013 film)
Fun in Space
GK Films
GLAAD
GLAAD Media Award
GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Film – Wide Release
Gemma Arterton
Gentleman's Agreement
George Michael
Gervaise (film)
Get Out
Ghosted (2023 film)
Gladiator (2000 film)
God Save the Queen (band)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Awards
Graham King
Gran Torino
Gravity (2013 film)
Greatest Hits (Queen album)
Greatest Hits III (Queen album)
Greatest Hits II (Queen album)
Greatest Hits in Japan
Greatest Video Hits 1
Greatest Video Hits 2
Green Book (film)
Gwilym Lee
HIV/AIDS
Hammer to Fall
Heathrow Airport
Henry VIII (TV serial)
Hereafter (film)
Heteragrion freddiemercuryi
Hidden Figures
Hindustan Times
Hollywood Records
Hollywood accounting
Hot Rock & Alternative Songs
Hot Space
Hot Space (album)
Hot Space Tour
Human Rights Watch
Hungarian Rhapsody: Queen Live in Budapest
IMAX
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
I Can Hear Music
I Want to Break Free
I Was Born to Love You (song)
Icon (Queen album)
Il Postino: The Postman
In My Defence
In the Heat of the Night (film)
IndieWire
Infernal Affairs
Innuendo (album)
Irish Independent
JFK (film)
Jack the Giant Slayer
Japan Academy Film Prize
Japan Academy Film Prize for Outstanding Foreign Language Film
Jazz (Queen album)
Jazz Tour
Jersey Boys (film)
Jim Beach
John Deacon
John Ottman
John Reid (music manager)
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Johnny Flynn (musician)
Joint Security Area (film)
Joker (2019 film)
Joseph Mazzello
Jurassic Park (film)
Justin Haythe
Kenny Everett
Kensington Market, London
Killer Queen
Killer Queen: A Tribute to Queen
Knives Out
Kramer vs. Kramer
L.A. Confidential (film)
LGBT film
La La Land
La La Land (film)
La Strada
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leather subculture
Leicester Square
Lenny (film)
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Letters from Iwo Jima
Life Is Beautiful
Lilies of the Field (1963 film)
Lindsey Stirling
Lion's Den (1988 film)
List of Bohemian Rhapsody cover versions
List of Queen concert tours
List of accolades received by Bohemian Rhapsody
List of accolades received by Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
List of awards and nominations received by Queen
List of highest-grossing films in Japan
List of highest-grossing films in South Korea
List of highest-grossing musicals
List of songs recorded by Queen
Live Aid
Live Killers
Live Magic
Live at Wembley '86
Live at the Rainbow '74
Living on My Own
Liza Minnelli
Logan Place
Longford (film)
Love Kills (Freddie Mercury song)
Love Me Like There's No Tomorrow
Love Story (1970 film)
Love of My Life (Queen song)
Lover of Life, Singer of Songs
Lucy Boynton
Mad Max: Fury Road
Made in Heaven
Made in Heaven (song)
Magic Tour (Queen)
Marc Martel
Maria Bello
Martha, Meet Frank, Daniel and Laurence
Mary Poppins (film)
Max Bennett (actor)
Mercurana
Mercury: The Afterlife and Times of a Rock God
Mercury Phoenix Trust
Messenger of the Gods: The Singles
Metacritic
Michelle Duncan
Middlesex
Midnight Express (film)
Mike Myers
Million Dollar Baby
Mohamed Ismail
Monsieur Verdoux
Monster's Ball
Moonlight (2016 film)
Motion Picture Association film rating system
Mountain Studios
MovieWeb
Mr. Bad Guy
Mr. Robot
Munich
Musical film
Mystic River (film)
Netflix
Never Boring
New Regency
New York Post
News of the World (album)
News of the World Tour
Newton Thomas Sigel
Nielsen Holdings
Nielsen VideoScan
Nightmare Alley (2021 film)
No Time to Die
Nobody's Fool (2018 film)
Nomadland
Norman Sheffield
Official Charts Company
On Air (Queen album)
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Beach (1959 film)
On the Waterfront
Once Upon a Time in America
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
One Night in Miami...
One Night of Queen
Oppenheimer (film)
Ordinary People
Orgies
Out of Africa (film)
Owen Gleiberman
Parasite (2019 film)
Parliament of Egypt
Parsi
Paste (magazine)
Patriots (play)
Paul Norris (visual effects)
Paul Prenter
Peter Morgan
Peter Travers
Platonic love
Platoon (film)
PostTrak
Prince Charles Cinema
Principal photography
Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture
Producers Guild of America Awards
Public Access (film)
Pulp Fiction
Queen's First E.P.
Queen: The Eye
Queen (Queen album)
Queen (band)
Queen + Adam Lambert
Queen + Paul Rodgers
Queen CD Single Box
Queen Extravaganza Tour
Queen Forever
Queen II
Queen Rock Montreal
Queen Rocks
Queen at Wembley
Queen at the Ballet
Queen discography
Queen on Fire – Live at the Bowl
Queen videography
RAF Bovingdon
Radio Ga Ga
Rain Man
Rami Malek
Red Special
Regency Enterprises
Review aggregator
Rock in Rio
Rocketman (film)
Rocky
Roger Taylor (Queen drummer)
Rogue One
Rolling Stone
Rotten Tomatoes
Roy Thomas Baker
Rush (2013 film)
Sacha Baron Cohen
Salon (website)
Saving Private Ryan
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Screen (magazine)
Screen Actors Guild Award
Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role
Screen Actors Guild Awards
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Seven (1995 film)
Shaolin Soccer
She Said (film)
Sheer Heart Attack
Sing-along
SingStar Queen
Slumdog Millionaire
Smile (band)
Sour Milk Sea (band)
Spartacus (film)
Special Broadcasting Service
Spike Edney
Star Fleet Project
Stephanie Zacharek
Stone Cold Classics
Stone Cold Queen: A Tribute
Straight Outta Compton (film)
Strange Frontier
Sully (film)
Sundays and Cybele
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Sunshine on Leith (film)
Superman Returns
Taxi Driver
Terms of Endearment
TheWrap
The 12″ Collection
The Audience (2013 play)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The A–Z of Queen, Volume 1
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Brian May Band
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Bridges of Madison County (film)
The Cardinal
The Chosun Ilbo
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Complete Works (Queen album)
The Cosmos Rocks
The Cross (band)
The Crown (TV series)
The Crown Jewels (box set)
The Daily Beast
The Daily Telegraph
The Damned United
The Dark Knight
The Deal (2003 film)
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Descendants
The Detroit News
The English Patient (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The Freddie Mercury Album
The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert
The French Connection (film)
The Game (Queen album)
The Game Tour
The Godfather
The Golden Boy
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great Pretender
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Grinch (film)
The Guardian
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Hectics
The Hollywood Reporter
The Hours (film)
The Indian Express
The Intouchables
The Jury (TV serial)
The King's Speech
The Korea Herald
The Last Emperor
The Last King of Scotland (film)
The Last Samurai
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Honour of Christopher Jefferies
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Miracle (album)
The Miracle Collector's Edition
The Numbers (website)
The Nutcracker and the Four Realms
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Other Boleyn Girl (2008 film)
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Platinum Collection (Queen album)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Queen (2006 film)
The Queen Family Singalong
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Right Stuff (film)
The Robe (film)
The Shawshank Redemption
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Singles Collection Volume 1
The Singles Collection Volume 2
The Singles Collection Volume 3
The Singles Collection Volume 4
The Sixth Sense
The Social Network
The Solo Collection
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Special Relationship (film)
The Spectator
The Story of Bohemian Rhapsody
The Sun (United Kingdom)
The Tin Drum (film)
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Untouchables (film)
The Usual Suspects
The Wages of Fear
The Works (Queen album)
The Works Tour
The Wrap
There Must Be More to Life Than This
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Tie Your Mix Down: A Queen Tribute
Tim Plester
Tim Staffell
Time (Freddie Mercury song)
Time (magazine)
Time Out (magazine)
Titanic (1997 film)
Toby Young
Tom Hollander
Tom Hooper
Top Gun: Maverick
Top of the Pops
Trident Studios
Twitter
Two Women
Ultra HD Blu-ray
Valkyrie (film)
Vanity Fair (magazine)
Variety (magazine)
Variety Insight
Virgin EMI Records
Vox (website)
We Are the Champions
We Are the Champions: Final Live in Japan
We Will Rock You
We Will Rock You: 10th Anniversary Tour
We Will Rock You (musical)
We Will Rock You (video)
Weighted mean
Wembley Arena
Wembley Stadium (1923)
Wild Bill (2011 film)
Wings of Desire
Witness (1985 film)
X-Men: Apocalypse
X-Men: Days of Future Past
X-Men (film)
X2 (film)
Zoroastrianism
http://ultimateclassicrock.com/brian-may-speaks-on-queen-biopic-problems/
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-25314219
https://uk.news.yahoo.com/news/bad-news-queen-fans-director-dexter-fletcher-drops-111333611.html
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mandrake/11014517/Ben-Whishaw-says-Freddie-Mercury-film-is-on-hold.html
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-news/11501483/Sacha-Baron-Cohen-rejoins-troubled-Freddie-Mercury-biopic.html
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bryan-singers-bohemian-rhapsody-casts-queen-bandmates-1028454
https://variety.com/2016/film/news/rami-malek-to-play-freddie-mercury-in-queen-biopic-bohemian-rhapsody-1201910261/
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-features/bohemian-rhapsody-queen-biopic-696188
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/fox-halts-production-queen-biopic-due-bryan-singer-absence-1063710
https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-42193912
https://screenrant.com/bryan-singer-bohemian-rhapsody-halts-production/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/bryan-singer-fired-directing-queen-biopic-set-chaos-1063977
https://variety.com/2018/film/news/bryan-singer-directing-credit-bohemian-rhapsody-1202842535/
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/bohemian-rhapsody-tailer-freddie-mercury-sexuality-twitter-rami-malek-bryan-fuller-a8354276.html
https://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/chart-beat/8458866/queen-bohemian-rhapsody-film-rock-charts
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/cineeurope-fox-revs-up-alita-bohemian-rhapsody-last-show-before-sale-1119730
https://www.foxmovies.com/movies/bohemian-rhapsody
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt1727824/
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v670695
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=bohemianrhapsody.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/bohemian_rhapsody
http://www.queenonline.com/news/bohemian-rhapsody-premiere-queenonline-pre-sale
https://www.udiscovermusic.com/news/trailer-queen-biopic-bohemian-rhapsody-2/
https://www.rollingstone.com/music/music-news/queen-unearth-live-aid-recordings-for-bohemian-rhapsody-soundtrack-719560/
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/queen-to-release-bohemian-rhapsody-original-film-soundtrack-on-october-19-300706926.html
https://consequenceofsound.net/2018/09/queen-bohemian-rhapsody-soundtrack-live-aid/
https://variety.com/2018/film/box-office/box-office-bohemian-rhapsody-opening-weekend-1202977060/
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/bohemian-rhapsody
https://www.indiewire.com/2018/10/bohemian-rhapsody-review-rami-malek-1202014286/
https://variety.com/2018/film/reviews/bohemian-rhapsody-review-rami-malek-freddie-mercury-queen-1202989409/
https://www.theguardian.com/music/2018/oct/24/real-freddie-mercury-bohemian-rhapsody
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2018/oct/23/bohemian-rhapsody-review-freddie-mercury-biopic-bites-the-dust
https://deadline.com/2018/10/halloween-venom-bohemian-rhapsody-predator-star-is-born-global-international-box-office-1202490940/
https://m.independent.ie/entertainment/movies/movie-reviews/bohemian-rhapsody-review-maleks-energy-and-conviction-overcome-the-dramatic-dips-of-a-film-thats-far-from-perfect-37459145.html
https://www.standard.co.uk/go/london/film/bohemian-rhapsody-story-behind-queen-freddie-mercury-biopic-a3971356.html
https://deadline.com/2018/10/moviegoers-do-the-fandango-as-bohemian-rhapsody-outpaces-a-star-is-born-in-advance-ticket-sales-freddie-mercury-biopic-eyes-40m-potential-start-1202492220/
https://deadline.com/2018/11/bohemian-rhapsody-nutcracker-weekend-box-office-tiffany-haddish-nobodys-fool-1202494598/
https://variety.com/2018/film/box-office/bohemian-rhapsody-box-office-opening-1203015893/
https://deadline.com/2018/11/bohemian-rhapsody-nutcracker-venom-star-is-born-incredibles-2-china-global-international-box-office-1202495705/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/aidan-gillen-tom-hollander-join-cast-bohemian-rhapsody-1043083
https://www.backstage.com/magazine/article/bohemian-rhapsody-doctor-filming-now-uk-2517/
https://www.bustle.com/p/does-rami-malek-really-sing-in-bohemian-rhapsody-heres-how-freddie-mercurys-legendary-voice-was-recreated-12800650
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2018/nov/06/uk-box-office-bohemian-rhapsody-peterloo
https://www.billboard.com/articles/news/pride/8483081/adam-lambert-cameo-bohemian-rhapsody-freddie-mercury
https://deadline.com/2018/11/the-grinch-bohemian-rhapsody-weekend-box-office-1202498901/
https://www.salon.com/2018/11/07/bohemian-rhapsody-called-out-for-factual-inaccuracies_partner/
https://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2018/11/bohemian-rhapsody-factually-incorrect-freddie-merc.html
https://deadline.com/2018/11/fantastic-beasts-the-crimes-of-grindelwald-opening-weekend-venom-bohemian-rhapsody-china-global-international-box-office-1202504405/
https://deadline.com/2018/11/fantastic-beasts-the-crimes-of-grindelwald-weekend-box-office-opening-widows-viola-davis-green-book-1202503142/
https://www.vox.com/2018/11/16/18071460/bohemian-rhapsody-queerphobia-celluloid-closet-aids
https://www.screendaily.com/news/bohemian-rhapsody-posts-healthy-162m-uk-opening-night/5133990.article
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bryanrolli/2018/05/15/bohemian-rhapsody-first-trailer-watch/
https://deadline.com/2018/11/ralph-breaks-the-internet-creed-ii-thanksgiving-box-office-1202505947/
https://twitter.com/Gwilymlee/status/958462975383363584
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/behind-screen/bohemian-rhapsody-rocks-thrs-new-behind-screen-podcast-1157465
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/09/sacha-baron-cohen-freddie-mercury-biopic-queen
https://deadline.com/2018/12/bohemian-rhapsody-crosses-600-million-worldwide-box-office-1202519477/
https://www.artofvfx.com/bohemian-rhapsody/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wac7R4JoRlk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DXBSlUvCzPk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lQV51HK_aG8
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-reviews/bohemian-rhapsody-movie-review-749424/
https://www.chicagotribune.com/entertainment/movies/sc-mov-bohemian-rhapsody-rev-1031-20181030-6-story.html
https://www.hindustantimes.com/hollywood/bohemian-rhapsody-movie-review-rami-malek-s-film-makes-a-little-silhouette-of-a-big-man-freddie-mercury/story-syPsvC5CE97deKJ7NzFyZM.html
http://www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20181217000340
https://deadline.com/2018/12/aquaman-spider-man-into-the-spider-verse-bohemian-rhapsody-china-global-international-box-office-1202521068/
http://english.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2018/12/03/2018120301116.html
http://english.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2018/12/31/2018123101007.html
https://www.facebook.com/BohemianRhapsodyMovie/videos/217791842435207/
https://nypost.com/2018/10/23/bohemian-rhapsody-is-not-the-freddie-mercury-biopic-we-deserve/
https://princecharlescinema.com/PrinceCharlesCinema.dll/WhatsOn?f=10033388
https://amp.radiox.co.uk/artists/queen/bohemian-rhapsody-film-singalong-cinemas-2019/
https://deadline.com/2019/01/aquaman-escape-room-weekend-box-office-first-weekend-2019-1202529013/
https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-46778561
https://www.empireonline.com/movies/bohemian-rhapsody/review/
http://time.com/5435386/bohemian-rhapsody-review/
https://www.timeout.com/london/film/bohemian-rhapsody
https://www.producersguild.org/news/432578/All-Motion-Picture-and-TV-Nominations-for-30th-Annual-Producers-Guild-Awards-presented-by-Cadillac.htm
https://www.nme.com/news/bohemian-rhapsody-worst-reviewed-golden-globes-winner-since-80s-2429215
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-news/bohemian-rhapsody-queen-south-korea-japan-777263/
https://movieweb.com/vanilla-ice-movie-dave-franco/
https://indianexpress.com/article/entertainment/hollywood/bohemian-rhapsody-highest-grossing-biopic-5498028/
https://deadline.com/2019/01/glass-m-night-shyamalan-opening-weekend-box-office-1202537391/
https://deadline.com/2019/01/glass-opening-weekend-night-shyamalan-bumblebee-bohemian-rhapsody-mary-poppins-returns-china-global-international-box-office-1202538422/
https://variety.com/2019/film/news/bohemian-rhapsody-bryan-singer-director-change-freddie-mercury-actor-1203112827/
https://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2018/11/11/bohemian-rhapsody-remains-box-office-queen-with-supersonic-285m-cume/
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/intl/japan/yearly/?yr=2018&p=.htm
https://www.thewrap.com/bohemian-rhapsody-750-million-global-box-office-without-china/
https://eiga.com/news/20190123/10/
https://www.thedailybeast.com/oscars-are-bohemian-rhapsody-and-vice-the-worst-best-picture-nominees-ever
https://deadline.com/2019/01/box-office-glass-anne-hathaway-matthew-mcconaughey-serenity-bombs-oscars-best-picture-1202542005/
http://www.eiren.org/boxoffice_e/index.html
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=intl&id=bohemianrhapsody.htm
https://variety.com/2019/film/news/bohemian-rhapsody-loses-glaad-award-nomination-bryan-singer-1203116481/
https://www.bbc.com/news/newsbeat-46998838
https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-47147570
https://www.washingtonpost.com/arts-entertainment/2019/02/06/bafta-drops-bryan-singer-bohemian-rhapsody-nomination-over-sexual-misconduct-allegations/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/karaoke-cosplay-help-bohemian-rhapsody-past-100-million-japan-1182309
http://www.queenonline.com/news/press-release-bohemian-rhapsody-digital-dvd-and-blu-ray-release-details
https://www.mediaplaynews.com/tag/top-disc-sellers/
https://www.officialcharts.com/chart-news/bohemian-rhapsody-takes-official-film-chart-number-1-becoming-the-fastest-selling-digital-download-movie-ever-in-the-uk__25675/
https://variety.com/2019/film/news/bohemian-rhapsody-china-release-fox-rami-malek-1203150711/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bohemian-rhapsody-gets-surprise-permission-china-release-1191060
https://www.sbs.com.au/topics/sexuality/fast-lane/article/2018/11/21/bohemian-rhapsody-becomes-highest-grossing-lgbtiq-movie-ever
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-trending-47370948
https://www.mediaplaynews.com/research/top-20-sellers-for-week-ended-2-16-19/
https://www.mediaplaynews.com/research/top-20-selling-blu-ray-discs-for-week-ended-2-16-19/
https://www.officialcharts.com/charts/film-chart/20190227/offfilm/
https://variety.com/2019/film/news/2019-oscars-winners-list-academy-awards-1203145638/
https://www.thewrap.com/roma-wins-bafta-awards-winners-list/
http://www.sagawards.org/media/news/releases/outstanding-film-and-television-performances-honored-25th-annual-screen-actors
https://web.archive.org/web/20190130014420/http://www.sagawards.org/media/news/releases/outstanding-film-and-television-performances-honored-25th-annual-screen-actors
https://www.officialcharts.com/charts/irish-video-chart/
https://www.officialcharts.com/charts/film-on-video-chart/
https://www.hrw.org/news/2019/03/04/egypt-should-win-oscar-hypocrisy-over-praise-rami-malek
https://ww.egyptindependent.com/mp-criticizes-rami-malek-over-homosexual-role/
https://www.slashfilm.com/bohemian-rhapsody-editing/
https://deadline.com/2019/01/bohemian-rhapsody-wins-golden-globe-best-film-drama-1202529671/
https://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2018/10/dont-believe-the-critics-if-you-like-queens-music-see-the-queen-film/
https://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2019/02/bohemian-rhapsodys-oscars-win-is-a-triumph-over-snobby-film-critics/
https://deadline.com/2019/03/dumbo-opening-weekend-captain-marvel-bohemian-rhapsody-china-global-international-box-office-1202585832/
https://deadline.com/2019/04/bohemian-rhapsody-box-office-profit-2018-freddie-mercury-queen-rami-malek-1202586151/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/bryan-singer-gets-directing-credit-bohemian-rhapsody-1119361
https://web.archive.org/web/20181021085213/http://www.varietyinsight.com/print_featurefilm_releases.php
https://www.varietyinsight.com/print_featurefilm_releases.php
https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/04/rami-malek-mr-robot-freddie-mercury-queen-biopic
https://deadline.com/2019/01/adam-lambert-bohemian-rhapsody-cameo-appearance-trucker-freddie-mercury-rami-malek-1202533733/
https://ultimateclassicrock.com/bohemian-rhapsody-oscar-wins/
https://spice.eplus.jp/articles/233053
https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2019/03/bohemian-rhapsody-censored-china
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-47939549
https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/Bohemian-Rhapsody-(2018)#tab=video-sales
http://www.queenzone.com/forums/1537030/bohemian-rhapsody-movie-cameos-and-other-weird-bits.aspx
https://www.officialcharts.com/chart-news/bohemian-rhapsody-achieves-the-biggest-opening-week-on-disc-since-the-greatest-showman__25779/
https://www.provideocoalition.com/art-of-the-cut-with-bohemian-rhapsody-editor-john-ottman/
https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/sunday-life/news/family-of-belfast-man-prenter-who-was-freddie-mercurys-pa-claim-movies-portrayal-destroys-his-name-37920667.html
https://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2019/11/04/box-office-joker-tops-300-million-us-and-900-million-worldwide/#72e656697779/
https://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2019/01/22/oscars-box-office-bryan-singer-spike-lee-bohemian-rhapsody-green-book-vice-widows-first-man/
https://bbfc.co.uk/releases/bohemian-rhapsody-2018
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/bohemian-rhapsody-v670695/cast-crew
https://deadline.com/2017/09/bohemian-rhapsody-lucy-boynton-mary-austin-queen-biopic-1202162755/
https://deadline.com/2017/08/queen-movie-cast-ben-hardy-gwilym-lee-joe-mazzello-bohemian-rhapsody-1202153081/
https://deadline.com/2017/08/allen-leech-queen-movie-bohemian-rhapsody-paul-prenter-freddie-mercury-1202158400/
https://deadline.com/2017/09/mike-myers-bohemian-rhapsody-freddie-mercury-waynes-world-rami-malek-bryan-singer-fox-1202167439/
https://deadline.com/2017/09/aaron-mccusker-cast-freddie-mercury-boyfriend-jim-hutton-queen-movie-bohemian-rhapsody-1202175280/
https://www.deadline.com/2013/07/sacha-baron-cohen-exits-freddie-mercury-biopic/
https://www.indiewire.com/2016/03/sacha-baron-cohen-says-david-fincher-eyed-queen-biopic-producers-wanted-freddie-mercury-to-die-mid-movie-263717/
https://deadline.com/2015/11/freddie-mercury-queen-anthony-mccarten-ben-whishaw-theory-of-everything-1201629179/
https://deadline.com/2016/11/queen-movie-rami-malek-freddie-mercury-bryan-singer-bohemian-rhapsody-1201848910/
https://www.nme.com/news/film/freddie-mercury-biopic-starring-ben-whishaw-will-s-875263
https://ew.com/tv/2017/05/09/rami-malek-freddie-mercury-queen-stephen-colbert/
https://deadline.com/2017/07/queen-movie-shooting-start-bryan-singer-rami-malek-bohemian-rhapsody-1202129667/
https://deadline.com/2017/12/dexter-fletcher-replaces-bryan-singer-on-bohemian-rhapsody-1202221696/
https://www.indiewire.com/2018/05/bohemian-rhapsody-director-dexter-fletcher-bryan-singer-exclusive-1201962712/
https://www.indiewire.com/2017/12/bohemian-rhapsody-bryan-singer-director-credit-dga-fox-1201903892/
https://deadline.com/2018/03/20th-century-fox-release-dates-bohemian-rhapsody-dark-phoenix-the-new-mutants-1202353890/
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-11340336
http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/showbiz/celebrity-interviews/2011/04/27/sacha-baron-cohen-is-perfect-to-play-freddie-mercury-but-we-can-t-mess-up-his-legacy-says-brian-may-86908-23089759
https://maxthetrax.com/2018/11/08/john-ottman-music-and-montage-in-bohemian-rhapsody/
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt1727824/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27894574#identifiers
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX5888130
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb17779927g
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb17779927g
https://viaf.org/viaf/31154135883515082964
https://web.archive.org/web/20201030225900/http://www.queenzone.com/forums/1537030/bohemian-rhapsody-movie-cameos-and-other-weird-bits.aspx
https://movieweb.com/bohemian-rhapsody-2-queen-biopic-brian-may/
https://www.irishtimes.com/culture/film/freddie-mercury-s-teeth-in-bohemian-rhapsody-meet-their-maker-1.3690832
https://deadline.com/2021/11/bohemian-rhapsody-profits-lawsuit-queen-freddie-mercury-writer-anthony-mccarten-fox-1234876595/
https://www.netflix.com/title/80994899
https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220111/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mandrake/11014517/Ben-Whishaw-says-Freddie-Mercury-film-is-on-hold.html
https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220111/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-news/11501483/Sacha-Baron-Cohen-rejoins-troubled-Freddie-Mercury-biopic.html
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058611236306706
https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-47623796
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27894574#P1712
https://aleph.nkp.cz/F/?func=find-c&local_base=aut&ccl_term=ica=unn20191032469&CON_LNG=ENG
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27894574#P1874
https://www.forbes.com/sites/johnarcher/2019/02/09/bohemian-rhapsody-4k-blu-ray-review-a-star-is-reborn/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190105025847/https://www.producersguild.org/news/432578/All-Motion-Picture-and-TV-Nominations-for-30th-Annual-Producers-Guild-Awards-presented-by-Cadillac.htm
https://variety.com/2018/film/news/bohemian-rhapsody-critics-reviews-roundup-rami-malek-1202990633/
https://www.detroitnews.com/story/entertainment/movies/2018/11/07/rhapsody-addresses-freddie-mercurys-sexuality/38437035/
https://www.spectator.co.uk/2018/10/a-succession-of-predigested-cliches-bohemian-rhapsody-reviewed/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190106153255/https://www.noted.co.nz/culture/movies/bohemian-rhapsody-kiwi-anthony-mccarten-wrote-queen-movie/
https://www.noted.co.nz/culture/movies/bohemian-rhapsody-kiwi-anthony-mccarten-wrote-queen-movie/
https://www.rollingstone.com/music/music-news/freddie-mercury-queen-biopic-bohemian-rhapsody-movie-fact-check-746195/
http://ultimateclassicrock.com/queen-smile-band-history/
http://www.queenconcerts.com/london.html
https://collider.com/galleries/bohemian-rhapsody-behind-the-scenes/
https://www.dvhn.nl/extra/Movie-mistakes-in-Bohemian-Rhapsody-17-facts-the-Queen-biopic-got-totally-wrong-23809088.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20181114230639/https://www.dvhn.nl/extra/Movie-mistakes-in-Bohemian-Rhapsody-17-facts-the-Queen-biopic-got-totally-wrong-23809088.html
https://screenrant.com/rocketman-movie-manager-john-reid-bohemian-rhapsody/
https://www.billboard.com/articles/news/pride/8485190/freddie-mercury-solo-career-things-you-didnt-know
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/music/interviews/freddie-mercurys-mother-losing-dear-boy-didnt-have-say-anything/
https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220111/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/music/interviews/freddie-mercurys-mother-losing-dear-boy-didnt-have-say-anything/
https://www.smoothradio.com/artists/freddie-mercury/parents-mother-father-sister-family-now/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210820173347/https://www.smoothradio.com/artists/freddie-mercury/parents-mother-father-sister-family-now/
https://www.thevintagenews.com/2018/09/13/freddie-mercury-was-a-zoroastrian/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190110014407/https://www.thevintagenews.com/2018/09/13/freddie-mercury-was-a-zoroastrian/
https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2018/11/freddie-mercury-true-story-relationships-mary-austin-jim-hutton
https://www.eonline.com/uk/news/983949/everything-bohemian-rhapsody-got-wrong-about-freddie-mercury-s-life
https://www.bustle.com/p/what-happened-to-paul-prenter-the-bohemian-rhapsody-villain-had-a-more-complex-relationship-with-the-band-irl-13040678
https://www.mirror.co.uk/film/how-paul-prenter-betrayed-freddie-13475372
https://www.informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/based-on-a-true-true-story/
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no2018147820
https://web.archive.org/web/20191203224305/https://collider.com/galleries/bohemian-rhapsody-behind-the-scenes/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190330051916/https://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2018/10/dont-believe-the-critics-if-you-like-queens-music-see-the-queen-film/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190307173726/https://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2019/02/bohemian-rhapsodys-oscars-win-is-a-triumph-over-snobby-film-critics/
https://dbn.bn.org.pl/descriptor-details/a0000003840560
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt15398776/
https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/Oppenheimer-(2023)
