Boys Town (film)
Boys Town is a 1938 American biographical drama film based on Father Edward J. Flanagan's work with a group of underprivileged boys in a home/educational complex that he founded and named "Boys Town" in Nebraska. It stars Spencer Tracy as Father Edward J. Flanagan, and Mickey Rooney with Henry Hull, Leslie Fenton, and Gene Reynolds.
The film was written by Dore Schary, Eleanore Griffin, and John Meehan, and was directed by Norman Taurog. Tracy won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance.
Legendary Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studio head Louis B. Mayer, who was a Belarusian-Canadian-American Jew known for his respect for the Catholic Church, later called this his favorite film of his long tenure at MGM.Although the story is largely fictional, it is based upon a real man and a real place. Boys Town is a community outside Omaha, Nebraska. In 1941, MGM made a sequel, Men of Boys Town, with Spencer Tracy and Mickey Rooney reprising their roles from the earlier film.


== Plot ==
A convicted murderer asks to make his confession on the day of his execution. He is visited by an old friend, Father Flanagan (Spencer Tracy) who runs a home for indigent men in Omaha, Nebraska. When the prison officials suggest that the condemned man owes the state a debt, Father Flanagan witnesses the condemned man's diatribe to prison officials and a reporter that describes his awful plight as a homeless and friendless boy who was a ward in state institutions. After the convicted man asks the officials to leave, Father Flanagan provides some comfort and wisdom. On the train back to Omaha, Father Flanagan is transformed in his humanitarian mission by revelations (echoed in the words) imparted by the condemned man's litany of hardships suffered as a child, without friends or family, and a ward of the state.
Father Flanagan believes there is no such thing as a bad boy and spends his life attempting to prove it. He battles indifference, the legal system, and often even the boys, to build a sanctuary that he calls Boys Town. The boys have their own government, make their own rules, and dish out their own punishment. One boy, Whitey Marsh (Mickey Rooney), is as much as anyone can handle. Whitey's elder brother Joe, in prison for murder, asks Father Flanagan to take Whitey—a poolroom shark and tough talking hoodlum—to Boys Town. Joe escapes custody during transfer to federal prison. Whitey stays, though, and runs for mayor of Boys Town, determined to win with his "don't be a sucker" campaign slogan.
Winning the election for mayor is Tony Ponessa (Gene Reynolds), a disabled boy. Whitey has an outburst after finding out the results. This nearly causes a fistfight between Whitey and outgoing mayor Freddie Fuller (Frankie Thomas). Since Whitey's arrival at Boys Town, he and Freddie did not get along too well. To settle their differences once and for all, a boxing match is held. Freddie defeats Whitey with Father Flanagan and all of the boys watching.
Whitey leaves Boys Town after getting defeated in the boxing match. Pee Wee (Bobs Watson), the Boys Town mascot, catches up with him and pulls on his sleeve, pleading, "We're going to be pals, ain't we?" Whitey, nearly in tears, refuses and pushes the child to the ground and tells him to go back. He storms across the highway and Pee Wee follows him. Pee Wee is suddenly hit by a car; Whitey leaves, feeling guilty and hurt. During an aimless walk in downtown Omaha, Whitey runs into his brother Joe, who mistakenly shoots him in the leg. Joe takes Whitey to a church and calls Flanagan anonymously, after which Whitey is taken back to Boys Town. The sheriff comes to get Whitey, but Flanagan offers to take full responsibility for the boy.
Whitey refuses to tell Flanagan about the robbery, because he has promised Joe not to inform on him. But when he realizes that his silence could result in the end of Boys Town, he goes to Joe's hideout. Joe, realizing with Whitey that Boys Town is more important than they, releases his brother from his promise. Joe protects him until Flanagan and some boys arrive at their hideout. The criminals are recaptured and Boys Town's reward is a flood of donations. Whitey is elected the new mayor of Boys Town by acclamation and Dave Morris resigns himself to go into more debt as Flanagan tells him of his new ideas for expanding the facility.


== Cast ==
Spencer Tracy as Father Flanagan
Mickey Rooney as Whitey Marsh
Henry Hull as Dave Morris
Leslie Fenton as Dan Farrow
Gene Reynolds as Tony Ponessa
Edward Norris as Joe Marsh
Addison Richards as The Judge
Minor Watson as The Bishop
Jonathan Hale as John Hargraves
Bobs Watson as Pee Wee
Martin Spellman as Skinny
Mickey Rentschler as Tommy Anderson
Frankie Thomas as Freddie Fuller
Jimmy Butler as Paul Ferguson
Sidney Miller as Mo Kahn
Gladden James as Doctor
Everett Brown as Barky
Robert Gleckler as Mr. Reynolds
Stanley Blystone as Guard (uncredited)
Kent Rogers as Tailor (uncredited)


== Reception ==
Boys Town was a box office success, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1938 and earning MGM over $2 million in profit. According to MGM records, the film earned $2,828,000 in the United States and Canada, and $1,230,000 elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $2,112,000.On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 90% based on 20 reviews, with an average rating of 7.20/10.


== Awards ==
In February 1939, when he accepted his Oscar for the role, Spencer Tracy talked about Father Flanagan in his acceptance speech. "If you have seen him through me, then I thank you." An MGM publicity representative mistakenly announced that Tracy was donating his Oscar to Flanagan, not having confirmed it with Tracy. Tracy said: "I earned the ... thing. I want it." The Academy hastily struck another inscription, Tracy kept his statuette, and Boys Town got one, too. It read: "To Father Flanagan, whose great humanity, kindly simplicity, and inspiring courage were strong enough to shine through my humble effort. Spencer Tracy."


== Home media ==
Boys Town was released on VHS by MGM on March 29, 1993, and re-released on VHS on March 7, 2000. On November 8, 2005, it was released on DVD as a part of the "Warner Brothers Classic Holiday Collection", a three-DVD set which also contains Christmas in Connecticut and the 1938 version of A Christmas Carol, and as an individual disc. The DVD release also includes the 1941 sequel Men of Boys Town as an extra feature.


== Sequel ==

Released in April 1941, Men of Boys Town takes a darker view of the issue of homeless and troubled youth. Tracy and Rooney reprise their characters as Father Flanagan and Whitey Marsh as they expose the conditions in a boys reform school. This film was released on VHS on December 23, 1993, but is now available only as an extra feature on Boys Town DVD.


== Popular culture ==
In the Northern Exposure television series 1991 episode "The Big Kiss", orphan Ed Chigliak watches Boys Town and is inspired to find out who his real parents are. He mentions the film reference to several other characters.
Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House of Representatives in 1994, referred to the film to argue that philanthropists would be able to help those people and organizations affected by government cuts.


== References ==


== External links ==

www.boystownmovie.org — official site
Boys Town at IMDb
Boys Town at AllMovie
Boys Town at the TCM Movie Database
Boys Town at Rotten Tomatoes
Boys Town at the American Film Institute Catalog1938 in film
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Bedtime Story
A Christmas Carol (1938 film)
A Yank at Eton
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Story
Academy Awards
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Addison Richards
AllMovie
All Hands on Deck (1961 film)
Are Husbands Necessary?
Belarusian Canadians
Big City (1948 film)
Biographical film
Blue Hawaii
Bobs Watson
Boys Town (organization)
Broadway Melody of 1940
Bundle of Joy
Catholic Church
Cecil Arthur Lewis
Christmas in Connecticut
College Rhythm
Columbia Pictures
DVD
Design for Scandal
Don't Give Up the Ship (film)
Dore Schary
Double Trouble (1967 film)
Dr. Goldfoot and the Bikini Machine
Drama (film and television)
Edward J. Flanagan
Edward Norris
Edward Ward (composer)
Eleanore Griffin
Elmo Veron
Everett Brown
Fifty Roads to Town
Finn and Hattie
Follow the Leader (1930 film)
Forbidden Adventure
Frank Capra
Frankie Thomas
G.I. Blues
Gene Reynolds
George Bernard Shaw
Girl Crazy (1943 film)
Girls! Girls! Girls!
Gladden James
Henry Hull
Hold 'Em Jail
Hot Curves
Huckleberry Finn (1931 film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
Ian Dalrymple
If I Had a Million
In Holland
It Happened at the World's Fair
Jews
Jimmy Butler (actor)
John Meehan (screenwriter)
John W. Considine Jr.
Jonathan Hale
Jumping Jacks
Kent Rogers
Leslie Fenton
List of Northern Exposure characters
Little Nellie Kelly
Live a Little, Love a Little
Living It Up
Loews Cineplex Entertainment
Louis B. Mayer
Lucky Boy (1929 film)
Lucky Night
Mad About Music
Martin Spellman
Men of Boys Town
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Mickey Rooney
Minor Watson
Mrs. O'Malley and Mr. Malone
Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch (1934 film)
Newt Gingrich
Nick Clooney
Norman Taurog
Northern Exposure
Omaha, Nebraska
Onionhead
Palm Springs Weekend
Pardners
Personal life
Please Believe Me
Presenting Lily Mars
Pygmalion (1938 film)
Reunion (1936 film)
Review aggregator
Rhythm on the Range
Rich, Young and Pretty
Robert Gleckler
Room for One More (film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Sequel
Sergeant Deadhead
Sidney Miller (actor)
Skippy (film)
Sooky
Speedway (1968 film)
Spencer Tracy
Spinout (film)
Stanley Blystone
Strike Me Pink (film)
Sunny Skies (film)
That Midnight Kiss
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1938 film)
The Beginning or the End
The Big Broadcast of 1936
The Birds and the Bees (film)
The Bride Goes Wild
The Caddy
The Diplomats (film)
The Fuzzy Pink Nightgown
The Girl Downstairs (film)
The Hoodlum Saint
The Medicine Men (film)
The Phantom President
The Stars Are Singing
The Stooge
The Toast of New Orleans
The Way to Love
Tickle Me
Troopers Three
Turner Classic Movies
VHS
Visit to a Small Planet
W. P. Lipscomb
We're Not Dressing
Words and Music (1948 film)
You're Never Too Young
You Can't Have Everything
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Young Tom Edison
http://www.boystownmovie.org/
https://www.nytimes.com/1995/07/30/obituaries/eleanore-griffin-91-screenwriter-shared-boys-town-oscar.html
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v6879
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0029942/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/3559
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/boys_town
https://archive.org/details/moviesthatchange00cloo/page/205
https://web.archive.org/web/20160304090942/http://www.adherents.com/people/pm/Louis_Mayer.html
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/69546/enwp
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0362-4331
