Captains Courageous (1937 film)
Captains Courageous is a 1937 American adventure film directed by Victor Fleming and starring Freddie Bartholomew, Spencer Tracy, Lionel Barrymore and Melvyn Douglas. Based on the 1897 novel of the same name by Rudyard Kipling, the film had its world premiere at the Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles. It was produced by Louis D. Lighton and made by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Filmed in black and white, Captains Courageous was advertised by MGM as a coming-of-age classic with exciting action sequences.
Backgrounds and exteriors for the film, which updated the story's setting to the mid-1920s, were shot on location in Port aux Basques, Newfoundland and Shelburne, Nova Scotia in Canada, and Gloucester, Massachusetts in the United States.


== Plot ==
Harvey Cheyne (Freddie Bartholomew) is the spoiled son of American business tycoon Frank Burton Cheyne (Melvyn Douglas). Harvey is shunned by his classmates at a private boarding school, and eventually suspended for bad behavior. His father therefore takes him on a business trip to Europe, travelling there by trans-Atlantic steamship. Mid-passage, Harvey falls overboard in the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. He is rescued by a Portuguese-American fisherman, Manuel Fidello (Spencer Tracy), and taken aboard the fishing schooner "We're Here", from Gloucester, Massachusetts.
Harvey is shocked the schooner's captain, Disko Troop (Lionel Barrymore), intends fishing in the Atlantic for three more months. He fails to persuade the captain to take him back to New York nor can he convince him of his wealth; but Captain Troop offers Harvey temporary crew membership until they return to port. Harvey is reluctant to do real work but eventually accepts. Befriended by Captain Troop's son, Dan (Mickey Rooney), he becomes acclimated to the demanding fishing lifestyle. The We're Here fills with fish they catch. When a prank of Harvey's causes a fish hook to lodge in a crewman's arm ("Long Jack", played by John Carradine), Manuel defends the boy.
In the climactic race back to the Gloucester, Massachusetts port against a rival schooner, the Jennie Cushman, Manuel climbs to the top of the mast to furl the sail. However, the mast cracks and he is plunged into the icy sea, tangled in the rigging that will cut him in half. Manuel speaks to the cook in Portuguese and the cook tells the Captain: All the bottom half of him is gone, and he doesn't want the boy to see. He tells the captain to cut him free from the boat, knowing this will kill him. Harvey crawls out on the wreckage, crying and distraught, while the captain strikes blow after blow after blow with the ax until the rigging finally parts. Manuel kisses the cross around his neck and sinks below the water. The schooner returns to port and Harvey is reunited with his father, who is impressed by his son's maturity. Harvey grieves for Manuel, pushing his father away and wanting to stay on the We're Here, but Disko reassures Cheyne, telling him that there is room in Harvey's heart for both men and that once there he “will find Manuel mighty satisfactory company.” At the church, Harvey lights two candles, one from Manuel to his father and one from him to Manuel. His father overhears Harvey praying that someday he will be with Manuel again and follows the boy to Manuel's dory, floating near the ship. Harvey is inconsolable and begs Cheyne to leave him alone.
The next day, in front of the Fisherman's Memorial, he and his father join the Gloucester community in casting bouquets and wreaths on the outgoing tide in tribute to the men and boys lost during this fishing season. The last shot shows the Cheyne's car, speeding down the road with Manuel's dory on a trailer behind. Through the side window, we see that Harvey is laughing and gesturing, regaling his father with stories of his adventures. Dissolve to a close-up of a smiling Manuel and then to the Fisherman's Memorial.


== Cast ==
Freddie Bartholomew as Harvey Cheyne
Spencer Tracy as Manuel Fidello
Lionel Barrymore as Captain Disko Troop
Melvyn Douglas as Frank Burton Cheyne
Charley Grapewin as Uncle Salters
Mickey Rooney as Dan Troop
John Carradine as "Long Jack"
Oscar O'Shea as Captain Walt Cushman
Jack La Rue as Priest (credited as Jack LaRue)
Walter Kingsford as Dr. Finley
Donald Briggs as Bob Tyler
Sam McDaniel as "Doc" (credited as Sam McDaniels)
Bill Burrud as Charles Jamison (credited as Billy Burrud)
Gladden James as Secretary Cobb (uncredited)
Frank Sully as taxi driver (uncredited)
Billy Gilbert as soda steward (uncredited)
Charles Coleman as Burns, the butler (uncredited)
Lester Dorr as corridor steward (uncredited)


== Reception ==
Frank S. Nugent of The New York Times called the film "another of those grand jobs of movie-making we have come to expect of Hollywood's most prodigal studio. With its rich production, magnificent marine photography, admirable direction and performances, the film brings vividly to life every page of Kipling's novel and even adds an exciting chapter or two of its own." Variety reported that the Kipling story had "been given splendid production, performance, photography and dramatic composition." Harrison's Reports wrote, "Excellent! It is the type of entertainment that audiences will not forget soon, for its spiritual beauty makes a deep impression on one." John Mosher of The New Yorker called it "as rich a film as you will see this spring ... The picture is magnificent as a sketch of storm and struggle on the ocean."


== Box office ==
According to MGM records the film earned $1,688,000 in the US and Canada and $1,445,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $355,000.


== Awards ==
Spencer Tracy won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his work in this film.  The movie was also nominated for three other Academy Awards:

Best Picture – Louis D. Lighton, producer
Best Film Editing – Elmo Veron
Best Writing, Screenplay – Marc Connelly, John Lee Mahin and Dale Van EveryA VHS edition of the 1937 film was released by MGM Home Video in 1990 followed by Warner Home Video's DVD of the film on January 31, 2006.
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:

2003: AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains:
Manuel Fidello – Nominated Hero
2006: AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers – #94


== In popular culture ==
Holden Caulfield, protagonist of the 1951 novel The Catcher in the Rye, is thought to look like Harvey Cheyne, as in the book a prostitute tells Caulfield that he looks like the boy who falls off a boat in a film costarring Melvyn Douglas, though the film is not mentioned by name.
The film is considered a classic semi-documentary record of Grand Banks Schooners fishing under sail. The back projection shots of the period fishing schooners under sail are frequently watched by members of the American Sail Training Community for the sailing shots - rather than for the human plot.
Chris Elliott has stated that Captains Courageous was the inspiration for the film Cabin Boy.
Franco Battiato dedicates a stanza to this film in his song Centro Di Gravità Permanente from his album: La voce del Padrone.


== See also ==
Lionel Barrymore filmography
Spencer Tracy filmography


== References ==


== External links ==
Captains Courageous at IMDb
Captains Courageous at the TCM Movie Database
Captains Courageous at AllMovie
Captains Courageous at the American Film Institute Catalog
Captains Courageous at Rotten TomatoesAFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers
AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Guy Named Joe
A Son of His Father
Abie's Irish Rose (1928 film)
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Film Editing
Academy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay
Academy Awards
Adventure (1925 film)
Adventure (1945 film)
Adventure film
AllMovie
American Film Institute
Anna Ascends
Around the World in 80 Minutes with Douglas Fairbanks
Bill Burrud
Billy Gilbert
Black and white
Bombshell (1933 film)
Cabin Boy
Captains Courageous
Carthay Circle Theatre
Charles Coleman (actor)
Charley Grapewin
Chris Elliott
Code of the Sea
Common Clay (1930 film)
DVD
Dale Van Every
Dark Secrets
Donald Briggs
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1941 film)
Elmo Veron
Empty Hands
English language
Franco Battiato
Frank Nugent
Frank Sully
Franz Waxman
Freddie Bartholomew
Gladden James
Gloucester, Massachusetts
Gloucester Fisherman's Memorial
Gone with the Wind (film)
Grand Banks of Newfoundland
Harold Rosson
Harrison's Reports
Holden Caulfield
Hula (film)
IMDb (identifier)
Jack La Rue
Joan of Arc (1948 film)
John Carradine
John Lee Mahin
John Mosher (writer)
La voce del Padrone
Law of the Lawless (1923 film)
Lester Dorr
Lionel Barrymore
Lionel Barrymore filmography
Loews Cineplex Entertainment
Lord Jim (1925 film)
Los Angeles
Louis D. Lighton
MGM
Mama's Affair (1921 film)
Mantrap (1926 film)
Marc Connelly
Melvyn Douglas
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Mickey Rooney
Oscar O'Shea
Port aux Basques, Newfoundland
Reckless (1935 film)
Red Dust (1932 film)
Red Hot Romance
Renegades (1930 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Rudyard Kipling
Sam McDaniel
Schooner
Shelburne, Nova Scotia
Spencer Tracy
Spencer Tracy filmography
Test Pilot (film)
The Awakening (1928 film)
The Blind Goddess (1926 film)
The Call of the Canyon
The Catcher in the Rye
The Devil's Cargo
The Farmer Takes a Wife (1935 film)
The Lane That Had No Turning
The Mollycoddle
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Rough Riders (film)
The Virginian (1929 film)
The Way of All Flesh (1927 film)
The Wet Parade
The White Sister (1933 film)
The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)
To the Last Man (1923 film)
Tortilla Flat (film)
Treasure Island (1934 film)
Turner Classic Movies
VHS
Variety (magazine)
Victor Fleming
Walter Kingsford
Warner Bros.
When the Clouds Roll By
Wolf Song
Woman's Place
World premiere
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/handv400.pdf
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/cheers100.pdf
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=EE05E7DF173FB52CA1494CC5B6799B886896
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0028691/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/76/enwp
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/3994?sid=31d9fc56-7d89-4cba-986c-30bf6692197a&sr=7.608802&cp=1&pos=0
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v8136
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/3994
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1003531_captains_courageous
