Casablanca
Casablanca, also known by its Arabic name Dar el-Beida (Arabic: الدار البيضاء, romanized: ad-Dār al-Bayḍāʾ, [adˈdaːru ɫbajdˤaːʔ], lit. 'White House'; Berber languages: ⵜⴰⴷⴷⴰⵔⵜ ⵜⵓⵎⵍⵉⵍⵜ, romanized: Taddart Tumlilt), is the largest city in Morocco and the country's economic and business center. Located on the Atlantic coast of the Chaouia plain in the central-western part of Morocco, the city has a population of about 3.71 million in the urban area, and over 4.27 million in the Greater Casablanca, making it the most populous city in the Maghreb region, and the eighth-largest in the Arab world.
Casablanca is Morocco's chief port, with the Port of Casablanca being one of the largest artificial ports in the world, and the second largest port in North Africa, after Tanger-Med (40 km (25 mi) east of Tangier). Casablanca also hosts the primary naval base for the Royal Moroccan Navy.
Casablanca is considered a Global Financial Centre, ranking 54th globally in the Global Financial Centres Index rankings for the year 2022, outperforming cities such as New Delhi, Jakarta, Istanbul, and Mexico City. Casablanca is ranked among the Emerging International contenders, and it is considered the largest financial center in Africa. The leading Moroccan companies and many of the larger American and European corporations doing business in the country have their headquarters and main industrial facilities in Casablanca. Recent industrial statistics show Casablanca is the primary industrial zone of the nation.


== Etymology ==


=== Anfa ===
Before the 15th century, the settlement at what is now Casablanca had been called Anfa, rendered in European sources variously as El-Anfa, Anafa or Anaffa, Anafe, Anife, Anafee, Nafe, and Nafee. Ibn Khaldun ascribed the name to the Anfaça, a branch of the Auréba tribe of the Maghreb, though the sociologist André Adam refuted this claim due to the absence of the third syllable. Nahum Slouschz gave a Hebrew etymology, citing the Lexicon of Gesenius: anâphâh (a type of bird) or anaph (face, figure), though Adam refuted this arguing that even a Judaized population would still have spoken Tamazight. Adam also refuted an Arabic etymology, أنف (anf, "nose"), as the city predated the linguistic Arabization of the country, and the term anf was not used to describe geographic areas. Adam affirmed a Tamazight etymology—from anfa "hill," anfa "promontory on the sea," ifni "sandy beach," or anfa "threshing floor"—although he determined the available information insufficient to establish exactly which. The name Anfa is now rendered in Neo-Tifinagh as ⴰⵏⴼⴰ.
The name "Anfa" was used in maps until around 1830—in some until 1851—which Adam attributes to the tendency of cartographers to replicate previous maps.


=== Casablanca ===
When Sultan Mohammed ben Abdallah (c. 1710–1790) rebuilt the city after its destruction in the earthquake of 1755, it was renamed "ad-Dār al-Bayḍāʾ " (الدار البيضاء The White House), though in vernacular use it was pronounced "Dar al-Baiḍā" (دار البيضاء literally House of the White, although in Moroccan Arabic vernacular it retains the original sense of The White House).Meaning white house in the Spanish language, the origins of the name "Casablanca" are unclear, although several theories have been suggested. André Adam mentions the legend of the Sufi saint and merchant Allal al-Qairawani, who supposedly came from Tunisia and settled in Casablanca with his wife Lalla al-Baiḍāʾ (لالة البيضاء White Lady). The villagers of Mediouna would reportedly provision themselves at "Dar al-Baiḍāʾ" (دار البيضاء House of the White).In fact, on a low hill slightly inland above the ruins of Anfa and just to the west of today's city centre, it appears there was a white-washed structure, possibly a Sufi zawiya that acted as a landmark to sailors. The Portuguese cartographer Duarte Pacheco wrote in the early 16th century that the city could easily be identified by a tower, and nautical guides from the late 19th century still mentioned a "white tower" as a point of reference. The Portuguese mariners calqued the modern Arabic name to "Casa Branca" ([kazɐ'bɾɐ̃kɐ] White House) in place of Anfa. The name "Casablanca" was then a calque of the Portuguese name when the Spanish took over trade through the Iberian Union.During the French protectorate in Morocco, the name remained Casablanca (pronounced [kazablɑ̃ka]). Today, Moroccans still call the city Casablanca or Casa for short, or by its Arabic name, pronounced d-Dār l-Biḍā in Moroccan Arabic or ad-Dāru-l-Bayḍā' in Standard Arabic.


== History ==


=== Early history ===
The area which is today Casablanca was founded and settled by Berbers by at least the seventh century BC. It was used as a port by the Phoenicians and later the Romans. In his book Description of Africa, Leo Africanus refers to ancient Casablanca as "Anfa", a great city founded in the Berber kingdom of Barghawata in 744 AD. He believed Anfa was the most "prosperous city on the Atlantic Coast because of its fertile land." Barghawata rose as an independent state around this time, and continued until it was conquered by the Almoravids in 1068. Following the defeat of the Barghawata in the 12th century, Arab tribes of Hilal and Sulaym descent settled in the region, mixing with the local Berbers, which led to widespread Arabization. During the 14th century, under the Merinids, Anfa rose in importance as a port. The last of the Merinids were ousted by a popular revolt in 1465.


=== Portuguese conquest and Spanish influence ===

In the early 15th century, the town became an independent state once again, and emerged as a safe harbour for pirates and privateers, leading to it being targeted by the Portuguese, who bombarded the town which led to its destruction in 1468. The town that grew up around it was called Casa Branca, meaning "white house" in Portuguese.
The town was finally reconstructed between 1756 and 1790 by Sultan Mohammed ben Abdallah, the grandson of Moulay Ismail and an ally of George Washington, with the help of Spaniards from the nearby emporium. The town was called ad-Dār al-Bayḍāʼ (الدار البيضاء), the Arabic translation of the Portuguese Casa Branca.


=== Colonial struggle ===
In the 19th century, the area's population began to grow as it became a major supplier of wool to the booming textile industry in Britain and shipping traffic increased (the British, in return, began importing gunpowder tea, used in Morocco's national drink, mint tea). By the 1860s, around 5,000 residents were there, and the population grew to around 10,000 by the late 1880s. Casablanca remained a modestly sized port, with a population reaching around 12,000 within a few years of the French conquest and arrival of French colonialists in 1906. By 1921, this rose to 110,000, largely through the development of shanty towns.


==== Bombardment of Casablanca ====
The Treaty of Algeciras of 1906 formalized French preeminence in Morocco and included three measures that directly impacted Casablanca: that French officers would control operations at the customs office and seize revenue as collateral for loans given by France, that the French holding company La Compagnie Marocaine would develop the port of Casablanca, and that a French-and-Spanish-trained police force would be assembled to patrol the port.To build the port's breakwater, narrow-gauge track was laid in June 1907 for a small Decauville locomotive to connect the port to a quarry in Roches Noires, passing through the sacred Sidi Belyout graveyard. In resistance to this and the measures of the 1906 Treaty of Algeciras, tribesmen of the Chaouia attacked the locomotive, killing 9 Compagnie Marocaine laborers—3 French, 3 Italians, and 3 Spanish.In response, the French bombarded the city in August 1907 with multiple gunboats and landed troops inside the town, causing severe damage and killing between 600 and 3,000 Moroccans. Estimates for the total casualties are as high as 15,000 dead and wounded. In the immediate aftermath of the bombardment and the deployment of French troops, the European homes and the Mellah, or Jewish quarter, were sacked, and the latter was also set ablaze.
As Oujda had already been occupied, the bombardment and military invasion of the city opened a western front to the French military conquest of Morocco. 
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


=== French rule and influence ===

French control of Casablanca was formalized March 1912 when the Treaty of Fes established the French Protectorat. Under French imperial control, Casablanca became a port of colonial extraction.General Hubert Lyautey assigned the planning of the new colonial port city to Henri Prost. As he did in other Moroccan cities, Prost designed a European ville nouvelle outside the walls of the medina. In Casablanca, he also designed a new "ville indigène" to house Moroccans arriving from other cities.Europeans formed almost half the population of Casablanca.A 1937-1938 typhoid fever outbreak was exploited by colonial authorities to justify the appropriation of urban spaces in Casablanca. Moroccans residing in informal housing were cleared out of the center and displaced, notably to Carrières Centrales.


=== World War II ===

After Philippe Pétain of France signed the armistice with the Nazis, he ordered French troops in France's colonial empire to defend French territory against any aggressors—Allied or otherwise—applying a policy of "asymmetrical neutrality" in favour of the Germans. French colonists in Morocco generally supported Pétain, while Moroccans tended to favour de Gaulle and the Allies.Operation Torch, which started on 8 November 1942, was the British-American invasion of French North Africa during the North African campaign of World War II. The Western Task Force, composed of American units led by Major General George S. Patton and Rear Admiral Henry Kent Hewitt, carried out the invasions of Mehdia, Fedhala, and Asfi. American forces captured Casablanca from Vichy control when France surrendered 11 November 1942, but the Naval Battle of Casablanca continued until American forces sank German submarine U-173 on 16 November.Casablanca was the site of the Nouasseur Air Base, a large American air base used as the staging area for all American aircraft for the European Theatre of Operations during World War II. The airfield has since become Mohammed V International Airport.


==== Anfa Conference ====

Casablanca hosted the Anfa Conference (also called the Casablanca Conference) in January 1943. Prime Minister Winston Churchill and President Franklin D. Roosevelt discussed the progress of the war. Also in attendance were the Free France generals Charles de Gaulle and Henri Giraud, though they played minor roles and didn't participate in the military planning.
It was at this conference that the Allies adopted the doctrine of "unconditional surrender," meaning that the Axis powers would be fought until their defeat. Roosevelt also met privately with Sultan Muhammad V and expressed his support for Moroccan independence after the war. This became a turning point, as Moroccan nationalists were emboldened to openly seek complete independence.


=== Toward independence ===
During the 1940s and 1950s, Casablanca was a major centre of anti-French rioting.
7 April 1947, a massacre of working class Moroccans, carried out by Senegalese Tirailleurs in the service of the French colonial army, was instigated just as Sultan Muhammed V was due to make a speech in Tangier appealing for independence.Riots in Casablanca took place from 7–8 December 1952, in response to the assassination of the Tunisian labor unionist Farhat Hached by La Main Rouge—the clandestine militant wing of French intelligence. Then, on 25 December 1953 (Christmas Day), Muhammad Zarqtuni orchestrated a bombing of Casablanca's Central Market in response to the forced exile of Sultan Muhammad V and the royal family on 20 August (Eid al-Adha) of that year.


=== Since independence ===
Morocco gained independence from France in 1956.


==== Casablanca Group ====
4–7 January 1961, the city hosted an ensemble of progressive African leaders during the Casablanca Conference of 1961. Among those received by King Muhammad V were Gamal Abd An-Nasser, Kwame Nkrumah, Modibo Keïta, and Ahmed Sékou Touré, Ferhat Abbas.


==== Jewish emigration ====
Casablanca was a major departure point for Jews leaving Morocco through Operation Yachin, an operation conducted by Mossad to secretly migrate Moroccan Jews to Israel between November 1961 and spring 1964.


==== 1965 riots ====
The 1965 student protests organized by the National Union of Popular Forces-affiliated National Union of Moroccan Students, which spread to cities around the country and devolved into riots, started on 22 March 1965, in front of Lycée Mohammed V in Casablanca. The protests started as a peaceful march to demand the right to public higher education for Morocco, but expanded to include concerns of labourers, the unemployed, and other marginalized segments of society, and devolved into vandalism and rioting. The riots were violently repressed by security forces with tanks and armoured vehicles; Moroccan authorities reported a dozen deaths while the UNFP reported more than 1,000.King Hassan II blamed the events on teachers and parents, and declared in a speech to the nation on 30 March 1965: "There is no greater danger to the State than a so-called intellectual. It would have been better if you were all illiterate."


==== 1981 riots ====
On 6 June 1981, the Casablanca Bread Riots took place, which were sparked by a sharp increase in the price of necessities such as butter, sugar, wheat flour, and cooking oil following a period of severe drought. Hassan II appointed the French-trained interior minister Driss Basri as hardliner, who would later become a symbol of the Years of Lead, with quelling the protests. The government stated that 66 people were killed and 100 were injured, while opposition leaders put the number of dead at 637, saying that many of these were killed by police and army gunfire.


==== Mudawana ====
In March 2000, more than 60 women's groups organized demonstrations in Casablanca proposing reforms to the legal status of women in the country. About 40,000 women attended, calling for a ban on polygamy and the introduction of divorce law (divorce being a purely religious procedure at that time). Although the counter-demonstration attracted half a million participants, the movement for change started in 2000 was influential on King Mohammed VI, and he enacted a new mudawana, or family law, in early 2004, meeting some of the demands of women's rights activists.


==== Further history ====
On 16 May 2003, 33 civilians were killed and more than 100 people were injured when Casablanca was hit by a multiple suicide bomb attack carried out by Moroccans and claimed by some to have been linked to al-Qaeda. Twelve suicide bombers struck five locations in the city.Another series of suicide bombings struck the city in early 2007. These events illustrated some of the persistent challenges the city faces in addressing poverty and integrating disadvantaged neighborhoods and populations. One initiative to improve conditions in the city's disadvantaged neighborhoods was the creation of the Sidi Moumen Cultural Center.As calls for reform spread through the Arab world in 2011, Moroccans joined in, but concessions by the ruler led to acceptance. However, in December, thousands of people demonstrated in several parts of the city, especially the city center near la Fontaine, desiring more significant political reforms.


== Geography ==
Casablanca is located on the Atlantic coast of the Chaouia Plains, which have historically been the breadbasket of Morocco. Apart from the Atlantic coast, the Bouskoura forest is the only natural attraction in the city. The forest was planted in the 20th century and consists mostly of eucalyptus, palm, and pine trees. It is located halfway to the city's international airport.
The only watercourse in Casablanca is oued Bouskoura, a small seasonal creek that until 1912 reached the Atlantic Ocean near the actual port. Most of oued Bouskoura's bed has been covered due to urbanization and only the part south of El Jadida road can now be seen. The closest permanent river to Casablanca is Oum Rabia, 70 km (43.50 mi) to the south-east.


=== Climate ===
Casablanca has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification Csa). The cool Canary Current off the Atlantic coast moderates temperature variation, which results in a climate remarkably similar to that of coastal Los Angeles, with similar temperature ranges. The city has an annual average of 72 days with significant precipitation, which amounts to 412 mm (16.2 in) per year. The highest and lowest temperatures ever recorded in the city are 40.5 °C (104.9 °F) and −2.7 °C (27.1 °F), respectively. The highest amount of rainfall recorded in a single day is 178 mm (7.0 in) on 30 November 2010.


==== Climate change ====
A 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a "moderate" scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~2.5–3 °C (4.5–5.4 °F) by 2100, the climate of Casablanca in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Tripoli, Libya. The annual temperature would increase by 1.7 °C (3.1 °F), and the temperature of the warmest month by 1.6 °C (2.9 °F), while the temperature of the coldest month would actually decrease by 0.2 °C (0.36 °F).Moreover, according to the 2022 IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, Casablanca is one of 12 major African cities (Abidjan, Alexandria, Algiers, Cape Town, Casablanca, Dakar, Dar es Salaam, Durban, Lagos, Lomé, Luanda and Maputo) which would be the most severely affected by future sea level rise. It estimates that they would collectively sustain cumulative damages of USD 65 billion under RCP 4.5 and USD 86.5 billion for the high-emission scenario RCP 8.5 by the year 2050. Additionally, RCP 8.5 combined with the hypothetical impact from marine ice sheet instability at high levels of warming would involve up to 137.5 billion USD in damages, while the additional accounting for the "low-probability, high-damage events" may increase aggregate risks to USD 187 billion for the "moderate" RCP4.5, USD 206 billion for RCP8.5 and USD 397 billion under the high-end ice sheet instability scenario. Since sea level rise would continue for about 10,000 years under every scenario of climate change, future costs of sea level rise would only increase, especially without adaptation measures.


== Economy ==

The Grand Casablanca region is considered the locomotive of the development of the Moroccan economy. It attracts 32% of the country's production units and 56% of industrial labor. The region uses 30% of the national electricity production. With MAD 93 billion, the region contributes to 44% of the industrial production of the kingdom. About 33% of national industrial exports, MAD 27 billion, comes from the Grand Casablanca; 30% of the Moroccan banking network is concentrated in Casablanca.Casablanca is considered a global financial centre, ranking 53rd globally in the Global Financial Centres Index for the year 2021, outperforming many cities such as Mumbai, New Delhi, Berlin, Istanbul, Mexico City, Glasgow, Jakarta, Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Riyadh, Doha, Kuwait City, Cape Town, and Johannesburg. Casablanca is ranked among the emerging international contenders, and it is the largest financial center in Africa.One of the most important Casablancan exports is phosphate. Other industries include fishing, fish canning, sawmills, furniture production, building materials, glass, textiles, electronics, leather work, processed food, spirits, soft drinks, and cigarettes.The Casablanca and Mohammedia seaports activity represent 50% of the international commercial flows of Morocco. Almost the entire Casablanca waterfront is under development, mainly the construction of huge entertainment centres between the port and Hassan II Mosque, the Anfa Resort project near the business, entertainment and living centre of Megarama, the shopping and entertainment complex of Morocco Mall, as well as a complete renovation of the coastal walkway. The Sindbad park is planned to be totally renewed with rides, games and entertainment services.Royal Air Maroc has its head office at the Casablanca-Anfa Airport. In 2004, it announced that it was moving its head office from Casablanca to a location in Province of Nouaceur, close to Mohammed V International Airport. The agreement to build the head office in Nouaceur was signed in 2009.The largest CBD both in Casablanca and the Maghreb is in Sidi Maarouf, near the Hassan II Mosque.


== Administrative divisions ==
Casablanca is a commune, part of the region of Casablanca-Settat. The commune is divided into eight districts or prefectures, which are themselves divided into 16 subdivisions or arrondissements and one municipality. The districts and their subdivisions are:
Aïn Chock (عين الشق) – Aïn Chock (عين الشق)
Aïn Sebaâ - Hay Mohammadi (عين السبع الحي المحمدي) – Aïn Sebaâ (عين السبع), Hay Mohammadi (الحي المحمدي), Roches Noires (روش نوار).
Anfa (أنفا) – Anfa (أنفا), Maârif (المعاريف), Sidi Belyout (سيدي بليوط).
Ben M'Sick (بن مسيك) – Ben M'Sick (بن مسيك), Sbata (سباته).
Sidi Bernoussi (سيدي برنوصي) – Sidi Bernoussi (سيدي برنوصي), Sidi Moumen (سيدي مومن).
Al Fida - Mers Sultan (الفداء – مرس السلطان) – Al Fida (الفداء); Mechouar (المشور) (municipality), Mers Sultan (مرس السلطان).
Hay Hassani (الحي الحسني) – Hay Hassani (الحي الحسني).
Moulay Rachid (مولاي رشيد) – Moulay Rachid (مولاي رشيد), Sidi Othmane (سيدي عثمان).


=== Neighborhoods ===
The list of neighborhoods is indicative and not complete:


== Demographics ==
The commune of Casablanca recorded a population of 3,359,818 in the 2014 Moroccan census. About 98% live in urban areas. Around 25% of the population are under 15 years old, and 9% are over 60 years old. The population of the city is about 11% of the total population of Morocco. Grand Casablanca is also the largest urban area in the Maghreb. 99.9% of the population of Morocco are Arab and Berber Muslims. During the French protectorate in Morocco, European Christians formed almost half the population of Casablanca. Since Moroccan independence in 1956, the European population has decreased substantially. The city also is still home to a small community of Moroccan Christians, as well as a small group of foreign Roman Catholic and Protestant residents.


=== Judaism in Casablanca ===
Jews have a long history in Casablanca. A Sephardic Jewish community was in Anfa up to the destruction of the city by the Portuguese in 1468. Jews were slow to return to the town, but by 1750, the Rabbi Elijah synagogue was built as the first Jewish synagogue in Casablanca. It was destroyed along with much of the town in the 1755 Lisbon earthquake.In the mid-19th century, with commercial development through European economic penetration, industrial imports from Europe drove traditional Jewish crafts out of the market, costing many Jews in the interior their traditional livelihoods. Moroccan Jews started migrating from the interior to coastal cities such as Essaouira, Mazagan, Asfi, and later Casablanca for economic opportunity, participating in trade with Europeans and the development of those cities.Casablanca's mellah was ravaged in the bombardment of Casablanca of 1907, the beginning of the French invasion of Morocco from the West.Jean-Louis Cohen highlights the roll of Jewish patrons in the architecture and urban development of Casablanca, particularly in construction of the overwhelming majority of the city's tallest buildings during the interwar period. One notable example of this trend is the Lévy-Bendayan Building designed by Marius Boyer.
Approximately 28,000 Moroccan Jews immigrated to the State of Israel between 1948 and 1951, many through Casablanca. Casablanca then became a departure point in Operation Yachin, the covert Mossad-organized migration operation from 1961 to 1964. In 2018 it was estimated that there were only 2,500 Moroccan Jews living in Casablanca, while according to the World Jewish Congress there were only 1,000 Moroccan Jews remaining.Today, the Jewish cemetery of Casablanca is one of the major cemeteries of the city, and many synagogues remain in service, but the city's Jewish community has dwindled. The Moroccan Jewish Museum is a museum established in the city in 1997.


== Education ==


=== Colleges and universities ===
Public: University of Hassan II Casablanca
Private:

Université Mundiapolis
Université Internationale de Casablanca


=== Primary and secondary schools ===
International schools:

Belgium: École Belge de Casablanca
French:
Collège Anatole France
Lycée Lyautey
Groupe Scolaire Louis Massignon
Lycée La Résidence
Lycée Maïmonide (FR)
Lycée Léon l'Africain
École Normale Hébraïque
École Al Jabr
Italian: Scuola "Enrico Mattei"
Spanish: Instituto Español Juan Ramón Jiménez
American:
Casablanca American School
American Academy Casablanca
George Washington Academy
Montessori:
École Montessori Casablanca


=== Libraries ===
Hassan II Mosque Foundation Multimedia Library
King Abdul Aziz Foundation for Human Sciences and Islamic Studies
Dar America
Institut Français
Instituto Cervantes


== Places of worship ==
Most of the city's places of worship are Muslim mosques. Some of the city's synagogues, such as Ettedgui Synagogue, also remain. There are also Christian churches; some remain in use — particularly by the West African migrant community — while many of the churches built during the colonial period have been repurposed, such as Church of the Sacred Heart.


== Sports ==


=== Association football ===
Casablanca is home to two popular football clubs: Wydad Casablanca and Raja Casablanca—which are rivals. Raja's symbol is an eagle and Wydad's symbol is a star and crescent, a symbol of Islam. These two popular clubs have produced some of Morocco's best players, such as: Salaheddine Bassir, Abdelmajid Dolmy, Baddou Zaki, Aziz Bouderbala, and Noureddine Naybet. Other football teams on top of these two major teams based in the city of Casablanca include Rachad Bernoussi, TAS de Casablanca, Majd Al Madina, and Racing Casablanca. 
Raja CA, founded in 1949, compete in Botola and play their home games at the Stade Mohammed V. The club is known for their supporters and is one of the most supported teams in Africa. Wydad AC, founded in 1937, also compete in Botola and play their home games at the Stade Mohammed V. Both have a strong reputation on continental competitions, having both won the CAF Champions League three times.
Casablanca hosted eight African Champions League finals, all eight at the Stade Mohammed V. The Stade also hosted the 2018 CHAN Final (which Morocco won) and 1988 African Cup of Nations final.


=== Tennis ===
Casablanca hosts The Grand Prix Hassan II, a professional men's tennis tournament of the ATP tour. It first began in 1986, and is played on clay courts type at Complexe Al Amal.
Notable winners of the Hassan II Grand-Prix are Thomas Muster in 1990, Hicham Arazi in 1997, Younes El Aynaoui in 2002, and Stanislas Wawrinka in 2010.


=== Hosting ===
Casablanca staged the 1961 Pan Arab Games, the 1983 Mediterranean Games, and games during the 1988 Africa Cup of Nations. Morocco was scheduled to host the 2015 African Nations Cup, but decided to decline due to Ebola fears. Morocco was expelled and the tournament was held in Equatorial Guinea.


==== Venues ====
Stade Larbi Zaouli
Stade Mohamed V
Stade Sidi Bernoussi
Complexe Al Amal de CasablancaThe Grand Stade de Casablanca is the proposed title of the planned football stadium to be built in the city. Once completed in 2025, it will be used mostly for football matches and will serve as the home of Raja Casablanca, Wydad Casablanca, and the Morocco national football team. The stadium was designed with a capacity of 93,000 spectators, making it one of the highest-capacity stadiums in Africa. Once completed, it will replace the Stade Mohamed V. The initial idea of the stadium was for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, for which Morocco lost their bid to South Africa. Nevertheless, the Moroccan government supported the decision to go ahead with the plans. It will be completed in 2025. The idea of the stadium was also for the 2026 FIFA World Cup, for which Morocco lost their bid to Canada, Mexico and United States. It is now hoping for the 2030 FIFA World Cup which Morocco is co-bidding with two European nations Spain and Portugal.


=== Road Racing ===
The city is host to the International Casablanca Marathon, a 26.2-mile road race that draws international competition. The race was founded in 2008 and is a member of the Association of International Marathons and Distance Races Archived 17 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine.


== Culture ==


=== Music ===
Haja El Hamdaouia, one of the most iconic figures in aita music, was born in Casablanca. Nass El Ghiwane, led by Larbi Batma, came out of Hay Mohammadi in Casablanca. Naima Samih of Derb Sultan gained prominence through the program Mawahib (مواهب). Abdelhadi Belkhayat and Abdelwahab Doukkali are musicians specializing in traditional Moroccan Arabic popular music. Zina Daoudia, Abdelaziz Stati, Abdellah Daoudi, and Said Senhaji are notable Moroccan chaabi musicians.
Abdelakabir Faradjallah founded Attarazat Addahabia, a Moroccan funk band, in 1968. Fadoul, another funk band, formed in the 1970s.Hoba Hoba Spirit also formed in Casablanca, and is still based there. Casablanca has a thriving hiphop scene, with artists such as El Grande Toto, Don Big, 7liwa, and Issam Harris.Casablanca hosts numerous music festivals, such as Jazzablanca and L'Boulevard, as well as a museum dedicated to Andalusi music, Dar ul-Aala.


=== Literature ===
Francesco Cavalli's L'Ormindo is a 17th century Venetian opera set between Anfa and Fes.The French writer Antoine de Saint-Exupéry is associated with Casablanca.
Driss Chraïbi's novel The Simple Past takes place in Casablanca. Mohamed Zafzaf lived in Maarif while writing and teaching at a high school.Lamalif, a radical leftist political and cultural magazine, was based in Casablanca.
Casablanca's International Book Fair is held at the fair grounds opposite Hassan II Mosque annually in February.


==== Theater ====
Tayeb Saddiki, described as the father of Moroccan theater, grew up in Casablanca and made his career there. Hanane el-Fadili and Hassan El Fad are popular comedians from Casablanca. Gad Elmaleh is another comedian from Casablanca, though he has made his career abroad.


=== Visual art ===
The École des Beaux-Arts of Casablanca was founded in 1919 by a French Orientalist painter named Édouard Brindeau de Jarny, who started his career teaching drawing at Lycée Lyautey. The Casablanca School—a Modernist art movement and collective including artists such as Farid Belkahia, Mohamed Melehi, and Mohammed Chabâa—developed out of the École des Beaux-Arts of Casablanca in the late 1960s.The Academy of Traditional Arts, part of the Hassan II Mosque complex, was founded 31 October 2012.L'Uzine is a community-based art and culture space in Casablanca.Rebel Spirit published The Casablanca Guide (الدليل البيضاوي, Le Guide Casablancais) a comic book about life in Casablanca.Sbagha Bagha is a street art festival during which murals are created on the sides of apartment buildings.


=== Photography ===
Postcard companies such as Léon & Lévy were active in Casablanca. Gabriel Veyre also worked and eventually died in Casablanca.
Marcelin Flandrin (1889-1957), a French military photographer, settled in Casablanca and recorded much of the early colonial period in Morocco with his photography. With his staged nude postcard photos taken in Casablanca's colonial brothel quarter, Flandrin was also responsible for disseminating the orientalist image of Moroccan women as sexual objects.Casablanca has a thriving street photography scene. Yoriyas is prominent among photographers capturing the economic capital's street scenes, and has attracted international attention.


=== Film ===
In the first half of the 20th century, Casablanca had many movie theaters, such as Cinema Rialto, Cinema Lynx and Cinema Vox, the largest in Africa when it was built.The 1942 American film Casablanca is set in Casablanca and has had a lasting impact on the city's image although it was filmed in the United States. Salut Casa! was a propaganda film brandishing France's purported colonial triumph in its mission civilisatrice in the city.Mostafa Derkaoui's revolutionary independent film About Some Meaningless Events (1974) took place in Casablanca. It was the main subject of Ali Essafi's documentary Before the Dying of the Light.Love in Casablanca (1991), starring Abdelkarim Derqaoui and Muna Fettou, is one of the first Moroccan films to deal with Morocco's complex realities and to depict life in Casablanca with verisimilitude. Nour-Eddine Lakhmari's Casanegra (2008) depicts the harsh realities of Casablanca's working classes. The films Ali Zaoua (2000), Horses of God (2012), and Razzia (2017) of Nabil Ayouch, a French director of Moroccan heritage, deal with street crime, terrorism and social issues in Casablanca, respectively. The events in Meryem Benm'Barek-Aloïsi's 2018 film Sofia revolve around an illegitimate pregnancy in Casablanca. Ahmed El Maanouni, Hicham Lasri and Said Naciri are also from Casablanca.


=== Architecture ===

Casablanca's architecture and urban development are historically significant. The city is home to many notable buildings in a variety of styles, including traditional Moroccan architecture, various colonial architectural styles, Art Nouveau, Art Deco, Neo-Mauresque, Streamline Moderne, Modernism, Brutalism, and more. During the French Protectorate, the French government described Casablanca as a "laboratory of urbanism."The work of the Groupe des Architectes Modernes Marocains (GAMMA) on public housing projects—such as Carrières Centrales in Hay Mohammadi—in a style described as vernacular modernism influenced modernist architecture around the world.Casamémoire and MAMMA. are two organizations dedicated to the preservation and appreciation of the city's architectural heritage.


== Transport ==


=== Rapid transit ===

The Casablanca Tramway is the rapid transit tram system in Casablanca. As of 2019, the network consists of two lines covering 47.5 km (30 mi), with 71 stops; further lines (T3 and T4) are under construction.Since the 1970s, Casablanca had planned to build a metro system to offer some relief to the problems of traffic congestion and poor air quality. However, the city council voted to abandon the metro project in 2014 due to high costs, and decided to continue expanding the already operating tram system instead.


=== Air ===
Casablanca's main airport is Mohammed V International Airport, Morocco's busiest airport. Regular domestic flights serve Marrakech, Rabat, Agadir, Oujda, Tangier, Al Hoceima, and Laayoune, as well as other cities.
Casablanca is well-served by international flights to Europe, especially French and Spanish airports, and has regular connections to North American, Middle Eastern and sub-Saharan African destinations. New York City, Montreal, Paris, Washington D.C., London and Dubai are important primary destinations.
The older, smaller Casablanca-Anfa Airport to the west of the city, served certain destinations including Damascus and Tunis, and was largely closed to international civilian traffic in 2006. It was eventually demolished to make way for construction of the "Casablanca Finance City", the new heart of the city of Casablanca. Casablanca Tit Mellil Airport is located in the nearby community of Tit Mellil.


=== Coach buses ===
Compagnie de Transports au Maroc (CTM) offers private intercity coach buses on various lines run servicing most notable Moroccan towns, as well as a number of European cities. These run from the CTM Bus Station on Leo Africanus Street near the Central Market in downtown Casablanca. Supratours, an affiliate of ONCF, also offers coach bus service at a slightly lower cost, departing from a station on Wilad Zian Street. There is another bus station farther down on the same street called the Wilad Zian Bus Station; this station is the country's largest bus station, serving over 800 buses daily, catering more to Morocco's lower income population.


=== Taxis ===

Registered taxis in Casablanca are coloured red and known as petits taxis (small taxis), or coloured white and known as grands taxis (big taxis). As is standard Moroccan practice, petits taxis, typically small-four door Dacia Logan, Peugeot 207, or similar cars, provide metered cab service in the central metropolitan areas. Grands taxis, generally older Mercedes-Benz sedans, provide shared mini-bus like service within the city on predefined routes, or shared intercity service. Grands taxis may also be hired for private service by the hour or day.


=== Trains ===
Casablanca is served by three main railway stations run by the national rail service, the ONCF.

Casa-Voyageurs is the main intercity station, from which trains run south to Marrakech or El Jadida and north to Mohammedia and Rabat, and then on either to Tangier or Meknes, Fes, Taza and Oujda/Nador. It also serves as the southern terminus of the Al-Boraq high speed line from Tangier. A dedicated airport shuttle service to Mohammed V International Airport also has its primary in-city stop at this station, for connections on to further destinations.
Casa-Port serves primarily commuter trains such as the Train Navette Rapide (TNR or Aouita) operating on the Casablanca – Kenitra rail corridor, with some connecting trains running on to Gare de Casa-Voyageurs. The station provides a direct interchange between train and shipping services, and is located near several port-area hotels. It is the nearest station to the old town of Casablanca, and to the modern city centre, around the landmark Casablanca Twin Center. Casa-Port station is being rebuilt in a modern and enlarged configuration. During the construction, the station is still operational. From 2013, it will provide a close connection from the rail network to the city's new tram network.
Casa-Oasis was originally a suburban commuter station which was fully redesigned and rebuilt in the early 21st century, and officially reopened in 2005 as a primary city rail station. Owing to its new status, all southern intercity train services to and from Casa-Voyageurs now call at Casa-Oasis. ONCF stated in 2005 that the refurbishment and upgrading of Casa-Oasis to intercity standards was intended to relieve passenger congestion at Casa-Voyageurs station.


== Tourism ==
Although Mohammed V International Airport receives most international flights into Morocco, international tourism in Casablanca is not as developed as it is in cities  such as Fes and Marrakech.
The Hassan II Mosque, which is the second largest mosque in Africa and the seventh largest in the world, is the city's main tourist attraction. Visitors also come to see the city's rich architectural heritage.Popular sites for national tourism include shopping centers such as Morocco Mall, Anfa Place, the Marina Shopping Center, and the Tachfine Center. Additional sites include the Corniche and the beach of Ain Diab, and parks such as the Arab League Park or the Sindibad theme park.

			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


== Notable people ==

Lahcen Abrami - Former footballer
Amine Atouchi - Moroccan footballer
Khalil Azmi - Former Moroccan goalkeeper
Amal Ayouch (born 1966) – stage and film actress
Wissam Baraka – Moroccan footballer
Salaheddine Bassir – Moroccan footballer
Laarbi Batma – Moroccan musician and artist, founding member of Nas El Ghiwan
Larbi Benbarek – Moroccan footballer
Badr Benoun - Moroccan footballer
Miriem Bensalah-Chaqroun – Moroccan businesswoman
Jean-Paul Bertrand-Demanes – French footballer
Frida Boccara – French singer, Winner of the Eurovision Song Contest 1969
Aziz Bouderbala - Former Moroccan footballer
Merieme Chadid – Moroccan astronomer
Mustapha Chadili - Former goalkeeper
Achraf Dari – Moroccan footballer
Jean-Charles de Castelbajac – French fashion designer
Nabil Dirar – Moroccan footballer
Abdelmajid Dolmy - Former Moroccan footballer
Dizzy DROS – Moroccan rapper
Issam El Adoua - Moroccan footballer
Badr El Kaddouri - Former Moroccan footballer
Talal El Karkouri - Former Moroccan footballer
Gad Elmaleh – French/Canadian comedian
Bouchaib El Moubarki - Former Moroccan footballer
Youssef Fertout - Moroccan manager
La Fouine – Moroccan-French rapper
Khalid Fouhami - Former moroccan goalkeeper
Mohamed Fouzair - Moroccan footballer
Divina Frau-Meigs – sociologist and professor
El Haqed – Moroccan rapper
Serge Haroche – French physicist who was awarded the 2012 Nobel Prize for Physics
Shatha Hassoun – Moroccan/Iraqi singer
Lydia Hatuel-Czuckermann – Israeli Olympic fencer
Mouhcine Iajour - Moroccan footballer
Driss Joumad - former Morocco international footballer
Nadir Lamyaghri - Former Moroccan goalkeeper
Hamza Mendyl – Moroccan footballer
Hicham Mesbahi – Moroccan boxer
French Montana – American rapper
Nawal El Moutawakel – Olympic champion
Hakim Mouzaki - Moroccan footballer
Abderrahim Najah - International Basketball player
Noureddine Naybet – Moroccan footballer
Mostafa Nissaboury – Moroccan poet
Hakim Noury – Moroccan film director
Maurice Ohana – French composer
Faouzia Ouihya – Moroccan-Canadian singer
Azzedine Ounahi- Moroccan footballer
Jean Reno – French Hollywood actor
Youssef Rossi - Former Moroccan footballer
Abdelilah Saber - Former footballer
Youssef Safri - Moroccan football manager
Jamal Sellami - Moroccan football manager
Daniel Sivan – professor
Alain Souchon – French songwriter
Frank Stephenson – award-winning automobile designer
Hassan Saada – Moroccan boxer arrested for alleged rape before Olympic match
Sidney Taurel – naturalized American CEO of Eli Lilly and Company from 1998 to 2008
Richard Virenque – French cyclist
Muhammad Zarqtuni – Moroccan nationalist and resistance leader
Abdallah Zrika – Moroccan poet
Soufiane Choubani – Founder of the Moroccan National Debate Team


== In popular culture ==
The 1942 film Casablanca (starring Ingrid Bergman and Humphrey Bogart) is supposed to have been set in Casablanca, although it was filmed entirely in Los Angeles and does not feature a single Arab or North African character with a speaking role. The film depicts Casablanca as the scene of power struggle between various foreign powers, which had much more to do with the Tangier of the time. The film has achieved worldwide popularity since its release. Nominated for eight Academy Awards, it won three, including Best Picture.
A Night in Casablanca (1946) was the 12th Marx Brothers' movie. The film stars Groucho Marx, Chico Marx, and Harpo Marx. It was directed by Archie Mayo and written by Joseph Fields and Roland Kibbee. The film contains the song "Who's Sorry Now?", with music by Ted Snyder and lyrics by Bert Kalmar and Harry Ruby. It is sung in French by Lisette Verea playing the part of Beatrice Rheiner, and then later sung in English. Liszt's "Hungarian Rhapsody No. 2" is played twice, once by Chico on piano as an introduction to the "Beer Barrel Polka", and again by Harpo on the harp.
The city is featured in The Mysterious Caravan (1975), volume 54 in the original Hardy Boys series.
Casablanca is the setting for several chapters in Doubleshot, a 2000 James Bond novel by Raymond Benson. In the novel, one of the characters mentions that the 1942 film was shot in Hollywood and not on location.
Casablanca is one of the key locations in the 2006 video game Dreamfall, as it is where the primary protagonist of the game, Zoë Castillo, lives. Although the city is imagined in the year 2219, much of the present-day architecture is used for inspiration.
Casablanca is the setting for the first act of the 2016 World War II romantic thriller film Allied starring Brad Pitt and Marion Cotillard.


== Twin towns – sister cities ==

Casablanca is twinned with:

Casablanca also has cooperation agreements with:

 Bucharest, Roumania


== See also ==
Royal Palace of Casablanca
Rabat Zoo


== References ==


== External links ==

Official web site of Casablanca
Official Casablanca Tourism Website (in French)
Casablanca photo gallery (buildings and other landmarks with a history dating back to the French Protectorate)
Open Air Museum of 20th century architecture
 Geographic data related to Casablanca at OpenStreetMap1465 Moroccan revolt
1755 Lisbon earthquake
1755 Meknes earthquake
1951 Mediterranean Games
1955 Mediterranean Games
1959 Mediterranean Games
1961 Pan Arab Games
1963 Mediterranean Games
1965 Moroccan riots
1967 Mediterranean Games
1971 Mediterranean Games
1975 Mediterranean Games
1979 Mediterranean Games
1983 Mediterranean Games
1987 Mediterranean Games
1988 Africa Cup of Nations
1988 African Cup of Nations final
1991 Mediterranean Games
1993 Mediterranean Games
1997 Mediterranean Games
2001 Mediterranean Games
2003 Casablanca bombings
2005 Mediterranean Games
2007 Casablanca bombings
2009 Mediterranean Games
2010 FIFA World Cup
2013 Mediterranean Games
2014 Moroccan census
2015 Africa Cup of Nations
2018 African Nations Championship Final
2018 Mediterranean Games
2022 Mediterranean Games
2026 FIFA World Cup
2026 Mediterranean Games
2030 FIFA World Cup
2030 Mediterranean Games
2 Mars
7liwa
A Night in Casablanca
Abdallah Zrika
Abdelakabir Faradjallah
Abdelaziz Stati
Abdelhadi Belkhayat
Abdelilah Saber
Abdelkarim Derqaoui
Abdellah Daoudi
Abdelmajid Dolmy
Abdelwahab Doukkali
Abderrahim Najah
Abidjan
About Some Meaningless Events
Abu Bakr Ibn Abi Zaid as-Slawi
Abuja
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Awards
Academy of Traditional Arts
Académie internationale Mohammed VI de l'aviation civile
Achraf Dari
Africa
Agadir
Agadir-Ida Ou Tanane Prefecture
Ahl al Oughlam
Ahmed El Maanouni
Ahmed Sékou Touré
Ain Chock
Ain Diab
Ain Sebaa
Air Transport World
Airline hub
Aita (Morocco)
Al-Boraq
Al-Qaeda
Al Bidaoui
Al Fida
Al Fida - Mers Sultan
Al Haouz Province
Al Hoceïma Province
Alain Souchon
Alexandria
Algeciras Conference
Algiers
Ali Essafi
Ali Zaoua
Allal al-Qairawani
Allied (film)
Allies of World War II
Almoravid
Amal Ayouch
American Academy Casablanca
Amine Atouchi
Amman
Amsterdam
Andalusian classical music
André Adam (academic)
Anfa
Anfa (arrondissement)
Anfa Hotel
Anfa Place
Anfa expedition (1468)
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
Aousserd Province
Arab
Arab League Park
Arab world
Arabic
Arabic language
Arabic music
Arabization
Archie Mayo
Architecture of Casablanca
Arecaceae
Argentina
Armistice of 22 June 1940
Art Deco
Art Nouveau
Artificial
Asfi
Assa-Zag Province
Atlantic Ocean
Attacharouk
Attarazat Addahabia
Aujourd'hui le Maroc
Auréba
Axis powers
Azilal Province
Aziz Bouderbala
Azzedine Ounahi
Aïn Chock
Aïn Sebaâ
Aïn Sebaâ - Hay Mohammadi
BBC
Baddou Zaki
Badr Benoun
Badr El Kaddouri
Banu Hilal
Banu Sulaym
Barcelona
Barghawata
Beauséjour, Casablanca
Beer Barrel Polka
Before the Dying of the Light
Belgium
Belvedere (Casablanca)
Ben M'Sick
Ben M'Sick (arrondissement)
Ben M'Sik European Cemetery
Benslimane Province
Berber Jews
Berber languages
Berber people
Berkane Province
Berlin
Berrechid Province
Bert Kalmar
Bibcode (identifier)
Bombardment of Casablanca
Bombardment of Casablanca (1907)
Bordeaux
Botola
Bouchaib El Moubarki
Bouchentouf
Boujdour Province
Boulemane Province
Boulevard Mohamed-Zerktouni
Boulevard Mohamed V
Boulevard Moulay Youssef
Bourgogne, Casablanca
Bousbir
Bouskoura
Brad Pitt
Breadbasket
Brutalist architecture
Bucharest
Buenos Aires
Burkina Faso
Bus rapid transit
Busan
Béni-Mellal Province
Béni Mellal-Khénifra
CAF Champions League
CIL (Casablanca)
CNN
Californie, Casablanca
Calque
Canada
Canary Current
Cape Town
Carrières Centrales
Casa-Port railway station
Casa-Voyageurs railway station
Casablanca-Anfa Airport
Casablanca-Settat
Casablanca (disambiguation)
Casablanca (film)
Casablanca American School
Casablanca Bread Riots
Casablanca Cathedral
Casablanca Clock Tower
Casablanca Conference
Casablanca Conference (1943)
Casablanca Finance City
Casablanca Group
Casablanca Guide
Casablanca International Book Fair
Casablanca Metro
Casablanca School
Casablanca Stock Exchange
Casablanca Technopark
Casablanca Tit Mellil Airport
Casablanca Tramway
Casablanca Twin Center
Casablanca Uprisings of 1952
Casablanca derby
Casablanca metro
Casablanca tramway
Casablanca–Agadir expressway
Casablanca–Marrakesh expressway
Casablanca–Rabat expressway
Casamémoire
Casanegra (film)
Central European Time
Central Market (Casablanca)
Centre Ville, Casablanca
Chaabi (Morocco)
Chaouia (Morocco)
Charles de Gaulle
Chefchaouen Province
Chicago
Chichaoua Province
Chico Marx
China
Christianity
Christianity in Morocco
Christians
Chtouka Aït Baha Province
Cinema Lynx
Cinema Rialto
Cinema Vox (Casablanca)
City of Brussels
Civilizing mission
Climate change
Club Val D Anfa
Collège-Lycée Léon l'Africain
Collège Anatole France (Casablanca)
Commuter rail
Comoros
Compagnie Marocaine
Compagnie de Transports au Maroc
Complexe Al Amal
Dacia Logan
Dakar
Dakhla-Oued Ed-Dahab
Damascus
Daniel Sivan
Dar es Salaam
Dar ul-Aala
Decauville
Demographics of Morocco
Demonym
Derb Ghallef
Derb Sultan
Derb Tazi
Description of Africa (1550 book)
Deutscher Wetterdienst
Divina Frau-Meigs
Dizzy DROS
Doha
Doi (identifier)
Don Big
Doubleshot
Dreamfall
Driouch Province
Driss Basri
Driss Chraïbi
Driss Joumad
Drâa-Tafilalet
Duarte Pacheco Pereira
Dubai
Durban
Ebola virus disease
Economy of Casablanca
Economy of Morocco
Eid al-Adha
El-Jadida
El Grande Toto
El Hajeb Province
El Hank, Casablanca
El Haqed
El Jadida
El Jadida Province
El Kelâa des Sraghna Province
Equatorial Guinea
Errachidia Province
Es Semara Province
Essaouira
Essaouira Province
Ettedgui Synagogue
Eucalyptus
European Moroccans
European Theatre of Operations
Eurovision Song Contest 1969
Fadoul
Fahs-Anjra Province
Faouzia
Farhat Hached
Farid Belkahia
Ferhat Abbas
Fes
Fes, Morocco
Fez, Morocco
Figuig Province
Financial Centre
Financial center
Financial centre
Flag carrier
Flag of Casablanca
Fquih Ben Salah Province
France
Francesco Cavalli
Frank Stephenson
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Franz Liszt
Free France
French Montana
French North Africa
French Protectorate in Morocco
French Third Republic
French colonial empire
French colonial empires
French conquest of Morocco
French cruiser Galilée
French cruiser Gloire (1900)
French protectorate in Morocco
French protectorate of Morocco
Frida Boccara
Fès-Meknès
Gabriel Veyre
Gad Elmaleh
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Gauthier, Casablanca
Geographic coordinate system
George S. Patton
George Washington
George Washington Academy
German submarine U-173
Ghandi (Casablanca)
Glasgow
Global Financial Centres Index
Golden Tulip Farah Casblanca
Grand Casablanca
Grand Prix Hassan II
Grand Stade de Casablanca
Greater Casablanca
Groucho Marx
Groupe Scolaire La Résidence
Groupe Scolaire Louis Massignon
Groupe des Architectes Modernes Marocains
Guelmim-Oued Noun
Guelmim Province
Guercif Province
Gunpowder tea
Habous, Casablanca
Haja El Hamdaouia
Hakim Mouzaki
Hakim Noury
Hamza Mendyl
Hanane el-Fadili
Harpo Marx
Harry Ruby
Hassan El Fad
Hassan II Mosque
Hassan II Mosque Foundation Multimedia Library
Hassan II of Morocco
Hassan Saada
Hay Dakhla
Hay El Baraka
Hay El Hanaa
Hay El Hassani
Hay Farah
Hay Hassani
Hay Mohammadi
Hay Moulay Rachid
Hay Salama
Hebrew language
Hebron
Henri Giraud
Henri Prost
Henry Kent Hewitt
Hicham Arazi
Hicham Lasri
Hicham Mesbahi
History of Casablanca
History of Moroccan Jews
Hoba Hoba Spirit
Horses of God
Hot-summer Mediterranean climate
Hotel Kenzi Tower
Hubert Lyautey
Hubous
Hubous (Casablanca)
Humphrey Bogart
Hungarian Rhapsody No. 2
Hyatt Regency Casablanca
Hôpital Ben Msik
Hôpital Mohamed V
IPCC Sixth Assessment Report
ISBN (identifier)
ISCAE
ISSN (identifier)
Iberian Union
Ibn Khaldun
Ifrane Province
Inara (Casablanca)
Indonesia
Industrial labor
Inezgane-Aït Melloul Prefecture
Informal housing
Ingrid Bergman
Instituto Español Juan Ramón Jiménez
Islam
Israel
Issam
Issam El Adoua
Istanbul
Jakarta
Jamal Sellami
James Bond
Jardin de la Préfécture Ben Msik
Jazzablanca
Jean-Charles de Castelbajac
Jean-Louis Cohen
Jean-Paul Bertrand-Demanes
Jean Reno
Jerada Province
Jewish cemetery of Casablanca
Johannesburg
Jordan
Joseph Fields
Kajiado
Kenitra
Kenya
Khalid Fouhami
Khalil Azmi
Khouribga Province
Khémisset Province
Khénifra Province
King Abdul Aziz Foundation for Human Sciences and Islamic Studies (Casablanca)
Koudougou
Kuala Lumpur
Kuwait City
Kwame Nkrumah
Kénitra Province
Köppen climate classification
L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui
L'Boulevard
L'Ormindo
L'Uzine
L'Économiste
La Colline
La Fouine
La Main Rouge
Laarbi Batma
Laayoune
Lagos
Lahcen Abrami
Laimoun
Lamalif
Lamkansa, Casablanca-Settat
Larache Province
Larbi Batma
Larbi Benbarek
Laâyoune-Sakia El Hamra
Laâyoune Province
Leo Africanus
Lisette Verea
Lissasfa
List of cities in Morocco
List of largest cities in the Arab world
List of twin towns and sister cities in Morocco
List of universities, colleges and schools in Casablanca
Lomé
London
Los Angeles
Love in Casablanca
Luanda
Lycée La Résidence (Casablanca)
Lycée Lyautey (Casablanca)
Lycée Léon l'Africain (Casablanca)
Lycée Maïmonide
Lycée Maïmonide (Casablanca)
Lycée Mohammed V
Lycée français international Louis-Massignon
Lydia Hatuel-Czuckermann
Léon & Lévy
Lévy-Bendayan Building
M'diq-Fnideq Prefecture
MADEX index
MAMMA.
MASI index
Madrid
Maghreb
Maghrebi mint tea
Majd Al Madina
Major general (United States)
Malaysia
Maputo
Marcelin Flandrin
Marina Shopping Center
Marine ice sheet instability
Marion Cotillard
Marrakech
Marrakesh
Marrakesh-Safi
Marx Brothers
Mass grave
Massacre of April 7, 1947
Maurice Ohana
Mauritania
Mausoleum of Allal al-Qairawani
Mazagan
Maârif
Mechouar, Casablanca
Medina quarter
Mediouna, Morocco
Mediterranean Games
Meknes
Meknès Prefecture
Mellah
Mercedes-Benz
Merieme Chadid
Merinid
Mers Sultan
Meryem Benm'Barek-Aloïsi
Metropolitan area
Mexico
Mexico City
Michael Curtiz
Midelt Province
Migration of Moroccan Jews to Israel
Mini-bus
Miriem Bensalah-Chaqroun
Modern architecture
Modernism
Modibo Keïta
Mohamed Fouzair
Mohamed Melehi
Mohamed Zafzaf
Mohammed Chabâa
Mohammed VI of Morocco
Mohammed V International Airport
Mohammed V of Morocco
Mohammed ben Abdallah
Mohammedia
Mohammedia Prefecture
Montreal
Moorish Revival architecture
Moroccan Arabic
Moroccan Jewish Museum
Moroccan Jews
Moroccan hip hop
Moroccan independence
Morocco
Morocco Mall
Morocco national football team
Moroni, Comoros
Mossad
Mostafa Derkaoui
Mostafa Nissaboury
Mouhcine Iajour
Moulay Ismail
Moulay Rachid (arrondissement)
Moulay Rachid (district)
Moulay Yacoub Province
Mouna Hachim
Mudawana
Muhammad Zarqtuni
Mumbai
Muna Fettou
Muscat
Museum of Moroccan Judaism
Mustapha Chadili
Médiouna Province
Nabil Ayouch
Nabil Dirar
Nabila Rmili
Nadir Lamyaghri
Nador
Nador Province
Nahum Slouschz
Naima Samih
Narrow-gauge railway
Nass El Ghiwane
Nassim, Morocco
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Union of Popular Forces
Naval Battle of Casablanca
Naval base
Nawal El Moutawakel
Nazi Germany
Neo-Tifinagh
Netherlands
New Delhi
New York City
Nid D'Abeille
Nigeria
North Africa
Notre-Dame de Lourdes Church (Casablanca)
Nouaceur Province
Nouadhibou
Nouakchott
Nouasseur Air Base
Nour-Eddine Lakhmari
Noureddine Naybet
Novotel Casablanca City Center
OCLC (identifier)
ONCF
Oasis (Casablanca)
Oasis railway station
Old Madina
Oman
OpenStreetMap
Operation Torch
Operation Yachin
Oriental (Morocco)
Orientalism
Ouarzazate Province
Oued Ed-Dahab Province
Ouezzane Province
Oujda
Oujda-Angad Prefecture
Oulfa
Oum Er-Rbia River
PLOS One
PMC (identifier)
PMID (identifier)
Palmiers
Parc de Jeux Yasmina
Paris
Peugeot 207
Philippe Pétain
Pine
Places of worship
Polo, Casablanca
Polygamy
Port of Casablanca
Portugal
Portuguese language
Precipitation
Prefectures and provinces of Morocco
Privateers
Protestant
Province of Nouaceur
Qaid
RAC Casablanca
RSSSF
Rabat
Rabat-Salé-Kénitra
Rabat Prefecture
Rabat Zoo
Rachad Bernoussi
Racine (Casablanca)
Racing de Casablanca
Raja CA
Raja Casablanca
Raja Club Athletic
Ramallah
Rapid transit
Raymond Benson
Razzia (2017 film)
Rear Admiral
Rebel Spirit (artist)
Regions of Morocco
Rehamna Province
Relative humidity
Representative Concentration Pathway
Republic of Venice
Revolution of the King and the People
Richard Virenque
Rio de Janeiro
Riviera, Morocco
Riyadh
Roches Noires, Morocco
Roman Catholic
Romania
Romanization of Arabic
Romanization of Berber languages
Rotterdam
Royal Air Maroc
Royal Golf Anfa
Royal Mansour Casablanca
Royal Moroccan Navy
Royal Palace of Casablanca
Ruins of Anfa
Safi, Morocco
Safi Province
Said Naciri
Said Senhaji
Salaheddine Bassir
Salle Mohammed V
Salmia 2 (Casablanca)
Salut Casa!
Salé
San Sebastián
Sbagha Bagha
Sbata
Scuola "Enrico Mattei" (Morocco)
Sea level rise
Seal of Casablanca
Sefrou Province
Senegal
Senegalese Tirailleurs
Sephardic Jews
Serge Haroche
Service de Documentation Extérieure et de Contre-Espionnage
Settat Province
Shanghai
Shanty town
Shatha Hassoun
Sheraton Casablanca Hotel & Towers
Sidi Belyout
Sidi Bennour Province
Sidi Bernoussi
Sidi Bernoussi (arrondissement)
Sidi Ifni Province
Sidi Kacem Province
Sidi Maarouf
Sidi Maârouf
Sidi Moumen
Sidi Moumen Cultural Center
Sidi Othmane
Sidi Slimane Province
Sidney Taurel
Sister city
Skhirate-Témara Prefecture
Sofia (2018 film)
Soufiane Choubani
Souss-Massa
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Spanish language
Stade Larbi Zaouli
Stade Mohamed V
Stade Mohammed V
Stade Père-Jégo
Stade Sidi Bernoussi
Standard Arabic
Stanislas Wawrinka
State of Palestine
Streamline Moderne
Street photography
Sufism
Sultan
Sunshine duration
Synagogue
São Paulo
TAS de Casablanca
Tachfine Center
Talal El Karkouri
Talaq (Nikah)
Tan-Tan Province
Tanger-Med
Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima
Tangier
Tangier-Assilah Prefecture
Taounate Province
Taourirt Province
Tarfaya Province
Taroudant Province
Tata Province
Taxicab
Taxis of Morocco
Tayeb Saddiki
Taza Province
Ted Snyder
Telquel (magazine marocain)
Temple Beth-El (Casablanca)
The Hardy Boys
The Mysterious Caravan
The New York Times
Thomas Muster
Time zone
Timeline of Casablanca
Timeline of casablanca
Tinghir Province
Tit Mellil
Tiznit Province
Train Navette Rapide
Treaty of Fez
Tripoli, Libya
Troupes coloniales
Tunis
Tunisia
Turkey
Typhoid fever
Tétouan Province
UTC+1
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United Nations Square (Casablanca)
United States
University of Hassan II Casablanca
Université Internationale de Casablanca
Université Mundiapolis
Urban area
Vernacular modernism
Washington D.C.
Wayback Machine
White-washed
Who's Sorry Now? (song)
Wilad Zian Bus Station
Wilhelm Gesenius
Winston Churchill
Wissam Baraka
Wordmark of Casablanca
World Jewish Congress
World War II
Wydad AC
Wydad Athletic Club
Wydad Casablanca
Years of Lead (Morocco)
Yoriyas
Younes El Aynaoui
Youssef Fertout
Youssef Rossi
Youssef Safri
Youssoufia Province
Zagora Province
Zawiya (institution)
Zina Daoudia
Zoë Castillo
École Al Jabr
École Belge de Casablanca
École Hassania des Travaux Publics
École Normale Hébraïque
École des Beaux-Arts of Casablanca
École internationale de Casablanca
Écoles Belges au Maroc
Édouard Brindeau de Jarny
http://news.sky.com/skynews/article/0,,30000-1260317,00.html
http://www.iol.co.za/index.php?set_id=1&click_id=68&art_id=nw20070412144633223C139447
http://www.casainvest.ma/casainvest/tabid/55/Default.aspx
http://www.casainvest.ma/
http://www.royalairmaroc.com/Marchand/Us/index.jsp?rub=1801&rubid=1803
http://www.accessmylibrary.com/coms2/summary_0286-22062524_ITM
http://www.leconomiste.com/article.html?a=53387
http://www.casamemoire.org/index.php?id=29
http://www.topbladi.com/villes/casablanca.htm
http://www.casablanca.ma/index/html/html/prefecture-casa.html
http://www.railwaygazette.com/nc/news/single-view/view/casablanca-tram-contracts-awarded.html
http://www.casablanca.ma/
http://www.sun-trails.com/morocco-travel-blog/casablanca-more-than-a-movie/
https://books.google.com/books?id=3Wf_Av7-hIoC&pg=PA126
https://books.google.com/books?id=o4vrUbMK5eEC&pg=PA210
https://books.google.com/books?id=8KiCl5-MxMMC&pg=PA256
https://books.google.com/books?id=YM1RcocOxugC&pg=PA161
https://books.google.com/books?id=OT9bK03HEZkC&pg=PA25
https://books.google.com/books?id=YnqLfVRJ3AkC&pg=PP127
https://books.google.com/books?id=mDpbAAAAMAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=CyLqAAAAMAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=YNxtCc6d13kC&pg=PA53
https://books.google.com/books?id=UojVkyplkR0C&pg=PA23
https://books.google.com/books?id=BUsuAQAAIAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=V310AAAAMAAJ
http://maghrebemergent.com/actualite/maghrebine/item/38911-le-metro-fantome-de-casablanca-disparait-de-nouveau-au-profit-du-tramway.html
http://www.lefigaro.fr/flash-eco/2014/07/03/97002-20140703FILWWW00030-1-tram-mais-pas-de-metro-aerien-a-casablanca.php
http://www.pewforum.org/files/2012/12/globalReligion-tables.pdf
http://www.seatemperature.org/africa/morocco/casablanca-may.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20110722170400/https://www.casainvest.ma/casainvest/tabid/55/Default.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20071013111743/http://news.sky.com/skynews/article/0,,30000-1260317,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110903030342/http://www.casainvest.ma/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100326153532/http://www.casablanca.ma/index/html/html/prefecture-casa.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110719222242/https://www.kennesaw.edu/historymuseum/creatingcommunity.shtml
http://www.kennesaw.edu/historymuseum/creatingcommunity.shtml
https://books.google.com/books?id=om4olQhrE84C&pg=PA941
https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/4072985
https://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/30059022
https://books.google.com/books?id=kQ9dAAAAMAAJ
https://viaf.org/viaf/138316241
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4085164-3
https://catalog.archives.gov/id/10044575
https://web.archive.org/web/20151125051333/http://maghrebemergent.com/actualite/maghrebine/item/38911-le-metro-fantome-de-casablanca-disparait-de-nouveau-au-profit-du-tramway.html
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb11963215d
https://musicbrainz.org/area/afabefb2-4d4e-42ee-9edc-0a86ced989f9
http://www.cbs.gov.il/shnaton60/st04_04.pdf
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb11963215d
https://legation.ipower.com/blog/?p=270
http://casa-tram.ma//uploads/press/fichier/5c4b51f0d71e3.pdf
http://www.jeuneafrique.com/Article/LIN20035quesesramel0/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140810132950/http://www.jeuneafrique.com/Article/LIN20035quesesramel0/
https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/file/index/docid/778664/filename/NEW_DIASPORAS._THE_JERUSALEM_WORKSHOP._JUNE_2012.pdf
https://zamane.ma/fr/la-conference-de-casablanca/
https://www.yabiladi.com/articles/details/49827/janvier-1961-conference-casablanca-prelude.html
https://uia.org/s/or/en/1100002995
https://www.britannica.com/place/Casablanca-Morocco
https://www.yabiladi.com/articles/details/49006/decembre-1952-quand-casablancais-sont.html
http://public1.nhhcaws.local/content/history/museums/nmusn/explore/photography/wwii/wwii-north-africa-campaign/naval-battle-of-casablanca.html
https://www.atlasinfo.fr/Evenements-du-7-avril-1947-a-Casablanca-un-tournant-decisif-dans-la-lutte-pour-la-liberte-et-l-independance_a70631.html
https://zamane.ma/fr/nass-el-ghiwane-un-patrimoine-historique-2/
https://www.gqmiddleeast.com/culture/the-gritty-rise-of-issam
https://web.archive.org/web/20190421060700/http://ahdath.info/45601
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/travel/destinations/africa/morocco/casablanca/street-photography/
https://lens.blogs.nytimes.com/2017/04/26/casablanca-a-city-nothing-like-the-film-yoriyas-alaoui-ismaili/
https://www.moroccoworldnews.com/2019/06/276439/14th-annual-jazzablanca-set-to-open-july-2/
https://www.yabiladi.com/articles/details/83271/casablanca-tremplin-l-boulevard-devoile-vainqueurs.html
https://www.euronews.com/2019/07/23/street-art-brings-a-pop-of-colour-to-casablanca
https://www.npr.org/2011/06/13/137150753/despite-regional-upheaval-moroccans-flock-to-festival
https://www.nybooks.com/daily/2018/12/20/the-soccer-politics-of-morocco/
https://www.yabiladi.com/articles/details/24805/plus-belles-synagogues-maroc.html
http://fr.le360.ma/culture/video-la-musique-electronique-sinvite-au-sacre-coeur-53543
https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k62124674
https://pagesmagazine.net/en/articles/contact-zones/58cbd1fabf07dc00b19b0b8c
https://www.lemonde.fr/musiques/article/2017/11/27/le-folk-social-tout-en-douceur-de-yuma_5220828_1654986.html
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TnKiNPi-mi8
https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2019/apr/12/mohamed-melehi-casablanca-art-school-mosaic-rooms-london
https://web.archive.org/web/20171012045731/http://www.tlbbmagazine.com/bousbir-colonie-prostituees-dantan/
http://www.tlbbmagazine.com/bousbir-colonie-prostituees-dantan/
http://www.aujourdhui.ma/culture-details72137.html
http://www.telquel-online.com/archives/350/arts2_350.shtml
https://web.archive.org/web/20160303191309/http://www.telquel-online.com/archives/350/arts2_350.shtml
http://rol-benzaken.centerblog.net/15663-les-cin-mas-de-epoque-a-casablanca
https://www.lavieeco.com/culture/cinema-245-salles-fermees-entre-1980-et-2017/
https://www.moroccoworldnews.com/2019/03/268179/screen-morocco-nabil-ayouch/
https://www.lemonde.fr/culture/article/2019/08/24/sofia-le-recit-d-un-delit-de-grossesse-au-maroc_5502517_3246.html
https://www.febrayer.com/653890.html
https://lematin.ma/express/2018/laat-recompense-laureats-2016-2017/286852.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20191210122330/https://www.febrayer.com/653890.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20191125214845/https://lematin.ma/express/2018/laat-recompense-laureats-2016-2017/286852.html
http://ahdath.info/45601
https://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/07/world/africa/07iht-M07C-MOROCCO-SLUMS.html
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1981/08/25/a-black-saturday-shadows-the-future-of-hassans-morocco/8a5cb6ce-39b4-42b9-bb48-f3a196706961/
https://www.facebook.com/Joojmedia/videos/655302328329675/?v=655302328329675
http://2m.ma/fr/culture/abdelhadi-belkhayat-revient-sur-scene-avec-une-chanson-patriotique-20180725/
https://www.h24info.ma/videos/video-du-jour/video-du-jour-gad-elmaleh-enflamme-le-lycee-lyautey/
https://web.archive.org/web/20121005052807/http://www.sacred-destinations.com/morocco/casablanca-hassan-ii-mosque
http://www.sacred-destinations.com/morocco/casablanca-hassan-ii-mosque
http://www.laquotidienne.ma/article/societe/maroc-le-parc-sindibad-reamenage-ses-tarifs
http://parcsindibad.ma/afrique-sauvage/
https://web.archive.org/web/20111207022325/http://www.journaldunet.com/economie/actualite/depeche/afp/24/864782/le_plus_grand_centre_commercial_d_afrique_le_morocco_mall_ouvre_ses_portes.shtml
http://www.journaldunet.com/economie/actualite/depeche/afp/24/864782/le_plus_grand_centre_commercial_d_afrique_le_morocco_mall_ouvre_ses_portes.shtml
http://www.supratours.ma/en/
https://www.lonelyplanet.com/morocco/casablanca/transport/getting-there-away/land
https://www.hespress.com/regions/445016.html
https://www.moroccoworldnews.com/2019/08/281165/moroccan-airports-2-million-passengers/
https://www.moroccoworldnews.com/2019/05/272864/tourism-observatory-tourist-arrivals-in-morocco/
https://archive.org/details/picturingcasabla0000ossm/page/37
https://www.academia.edu/26035381
https://www.thenation.com/article/archive/morocco-faradjallah-attarazat-addahabia-habibi-funk-album-review/
https://www.okayafrica.com/arabic-funk-fadoul-morocco-james-brown/
https://aleph.nkp.cz/F/?func=find-c&local_base=aut&ccl_term=ica=ge242727&CON_LNG=ENG
https://www.afrik.com/maroc-le-metro-de-casablanca-tombe-a-l-eau
https://web.archive.org/web/20110715205105/http://www.royalairmaroc.com/Marchand/Us/index.jsp?rub=1801&rubid=1803
https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/MOROCCO-2018-INTERNATIONAL-RELIGIOUS-FREEDOM-REPORT.pdf
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/29/world/africa/pope-francis-morocco-christians.html
https://www.worldjewishcongress.org/en/about/communities/MA
https://web.archive.org/web/20200301093209/https://www.lonelyplanet.com/morocco/casablanca/transport/getting-there-away/land
https://www.thepolisblog.org/2012/07/adaptations-of-vernacular-modernism.html
http://worldcat.org/oclc/994563861
https://web.archive.org/web/20110512050930/http://www.visitcasablanca.ma/
http://rgph2014.hcp.ma/file/166326/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q7903#identifiers
https://books.google.com/books?id=98JmAAAAMAAJ&q=%22neutralit%C3%A9+dissym%C3%A9trique%22+petain
https://books.google.com/books?id=_JGwGBe1XO0C&q=edouard+brindeau+casablanca&pg=PA125
https://books.google.com/books?id=QtBazz0I7uYC&q=cinema+vox+casablanca+africa&pg=PA237
https://books.google.com/books?id=nKCkDwAAQBAJ&q=1953+team+x+casablanca&pg=PA27
http://casablanca.ma/Page_Centrale.aspx?Id_Page=5277
https://www.febrayer.com/651726.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/18/movies/before-the-dying-of-the-light-review.html
https://www.addustour.com/articles/1001618?s=14eb56b718bd9ef49fea6c539948b165
http://worldcat.org/oclc/479295174
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/855022840
https://ghostarchive.org/varchive/youtube/20211028/TnKiNPi-mi8
https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/pub/data/normals/WMO/1981-2010/RA-I/Morocco/WMO_Normals_ASCII_60155.csv
https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20211228/https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/18/movies/before-the-dying-of-the-light-review.html
https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220101/https://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/07/world/africa/07iht-M07C-MOROCCO-SLUMS.html
http://www.straitstimes.com/world/morocco-boxer-held-over-alleged-sex-attack-in-olympic-village
https://aims-worldrunning.org/races/859.html
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007559620005171
http://aujourdhui.ma/societe/hcp-le-grand-casablanca-compte-4-270-750-habitants-118242
https://web.archive.org/web/20101217164820/http://looklex.com/e.o/casablanca.htm
http://looklex.com/e.o/casablanca.htm
http://www.africa-ata.org/mc_casablanca.htm
https://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/vjw/Casablanca.html
https://isni.org/isni/0000000095136197
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX455464
https://data.nlg.gr/resource/authority/record178961
http://katalog.nsk.hr/F/?func=direct&doc_number=000641642&local_base=nsk10
https://www.idref.fr/189041714
https://books.google.com/books?id=egbOb0mewz4C&pg=PA323&dq&hl=en
https://www.nytimes.com/1953/12/25/archives/16-dead-in-casablanca-blast.html
https://books.google.com/books?id=peGyku_eREkC&pg=PA168
https://books.google.com/books?id=Qrst5uqJTKEC&pg=PA123
https://web.archive.org/web/20180219024554/http://www.pewforum.org/files/2012/12/globalReligion-tables.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20220331183009/https://www.addustour.com/articles/1001618?s=14eb56b718bd9ef49fea6c539948b165
http://www.leconomiste.com/article/casablanca-mon-amour-il-y-100-ans-le-bombardement-br-par-mouna-hachim-ecrivain-chercheur
https://web.archive.org/web/20110610113013/http://www.cbs.gov.il/shnaton60/st04_04.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20190204010942/http://casa-tram.ma/uploads/press/fichier/5c4b51f0d71e3.pdf
https://www.busan.go.kr/eng/SisterCities
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137327987_4
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/49225856
https://thefunambulist.net/history/casablanca-1952-architects-and-the-colonial-counter-revolution
https://ledesk.ma/culture/lopera-baroque-ormindo-de-francesco-cavalli-le-30-septembre-a-rabat/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220217212021/https://aims-worldrunning.org/races/859.html
https://crowtherlab.pageflow.io/cities-of-the-future-visualizing-climate-change-to-inspire-action
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter09.pdf
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Full_Report.pdf
https://www.rsssf.org/tables/88a.html
https://www.rsssf.org/tables/2018anch.html
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/479295174
https://doi.org/10.1057%2F9781137327987_4
https://doi.org/10.3917%2Fgen.086.0078
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/1155-3219
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0362-4331
https://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0217592
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0027-8378
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/994563861
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0261-3077
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/470477579
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/1049194278
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/922863437
https://books.google.com/books?id=R_aSAgAAQBAJ
https://libris.kb.se/xv8b9p9g1ph2fl4
https://edition.cnn.com/2023/03/15/football/morocco-joint-bid-portugal-spain-2030-world-cup-intl-hnk/index.html
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/77066581
https://www.quest-cdecjournal.it/casablanca-la-juive-public-and-private-architecture-1912-1960/
https://doi.org/10.48248%2Fissn.2037-741x%2F12572
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/n80131711
https://www.upi.com/Archives/1981/06/23/66-die-in-Morocco-riot/8708362116800/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200201225130/https://www.h24info.ma/videos/video-du-jour/video-du-jour-gad-elmaleh-enflamme-le-lycee-lyautey/
https://geohack.toolforge.org/geohack.php?pagename=Casablanca&params=33_32_N_7_35_W_region:MA_type:city(3500000)
https://web.archive.org/web/20190720013633/http://parcsindibad.ma/afrique-sauvage/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6619606
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019PLoSO..1417592B
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31291249
https://efus.eu/about-us/brussels/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210808183020/https://efus.eu/about-us/brussels/
https://id.oclc.org/worldcat/entity/E39PBJqvWR9y6q9JQgywGmjDMP
https://dbn.bn.org.pl/descriptor-details/9810589590805606
https://geohack.toolforge.org/geohack.php?pagename=Casablanca&params=33_32_N_7_35_W_region:MA_type:city(3359818)
http://www.casablancacity.ma/
https://web.archive.org/web/20231004222919/https://www.nodc.noaa.gov/archive/arc0216/0253808/1.1/data/0-data/Region-1-WMO-Normals-9120/Morocco/CSV/CASABLANCAANFA_60155.csv
https://www.nodc.noaa.gov/archive/arc0216/0253808/1.1/data/0-data/Region-1-WMO-Normals-9120/Morocco/CSV/CASABLANCAANFA_60155.csv
https://web.archive.org/web/20231006055138/https://www.dwd.de/DWD/klima/beratung/ak/ak_601550_kt.pdf
https://www.dwd.de/DWD/klima/beratung/ak/ak_601550_kt.pdf
