Casablanca (film)
Casablanca is a 1942 American romantic drama film directed by Michael Curtiz and starring Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman, and Paul Henreid. Filmed and set during World War II, it focuses on an American expatriate (Bogart) who must choose between his love for a woman (Bergman) and helping her husband (Henreid), a Czechoslovak resistance leader, escape from the Vichy-controlled city of Casablanca to continue his fight against the Germans. The screenplay is based on Everybody Comes to Rick's, an unproduced stage play by Murray Burnett and Joan Alison. The supporting cast features Claude Rains, Conrad Veidt, Sydney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre, and Dooley Wilson.
Warner Bros. story editor Irene Diamond convinced producer Hal B. Wallis to purchase the film rights to the play in January 1942. Brothers Julius and Philip G. Epstein were initially assigned to write the script. However, despite studio resistance, they left to work on Frank Capra's Why We Fight series early in 1942. Howard Koch was assigned to the screenplay until the Epsteins returned a month later. Principal photography began on May 25, 1942, ending on August 3; the film was shot entirely at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California, with the exception of one sequence at Van Nuys Airport in Los Angeles.
Although Casablanca was an A-list film with established stars and first-rate writers, no one involved with its production expected it to stand out among the many pictures produced by Hollywood yearly. Casablanca was rushed into release to take advantage of the publicity from the Allied invasion of North Africa a few weeks earlier. It had its world premiere on November 26, 1942, in New York City and was released nationally in the United States on January 23, 1943. The film was a solid if unspectacular success in its initial run.
Exceeding expectations, Casablanca went on to win the Academy Award for Best Picture, while Curtiz was selected as Best Director and the Epsteins and Koch were honored for Best Adapted Screenplay. Its reputation has gradually grown, to the point that its lead characters, memorable lines, and pervasive theme song have all become iconic, and it consistently ranks near the top of lists of the greatest films in history. In 1989, the United States Library of Congress selected the film as one of the first for preservation in the National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".


== Plot ==
In December 1941, American expatriate Rick Blaine owns a nightclub and gambling den in Casablanca. "Rick's Café Américain" attracts a varied clientele, including Vichy French and Nazi German officials, refugees desperate to reach the neutral United States, and those who prey on them. Although Rick professes to be neutral in all matters, he ran guns to Ethiopia in 1935 and fought on the Loyalist side in the Spanish Civil War.
Petty crook Ugarte boasts to Rick of letters of transit obtained by murdering two German couriers. The papers allow the bearers to travel freely around German-occupied Europe and to neutral Portugal. Ugarte plans to sell them at the club and persuades Rick to hold them. Before he can meet his contact, Ugarte is arrested by the local police under Captain Louis Renault, the unabashedly corrupt prefect of police. Ugarte dies in custody without revealing that Rick has the letters.
Then the reason for Rick's cynical nature—former lover Ilsa Lund—enters his establishment. Spotting Rick's friend and house pianist, Sam, Ilsa asks him to play "As Time Goes By". Rick storms over, furious that Sam disobeyed his order never to perform that song again, and is stunned to see Ilsa. She is accompanied by her husband, Victor Laszlo, a renowned fugitive Czechoslovak Resistance leader. A flashback reveals Ilsa left Rick without explanation when the couple were planning to flee as the German army neared Paris, embittering Rick. Laszlo and Ilsa need the letters to escape, while German Major Strasser arrives in Casablanca to prevent just that.
When Laszlo makes inquiries, Signor Ferrari, an underworld figure and Rick's friendly business rival, divulges his suspicion that Rick has the letters. Laszlo returns to Rick's cafe that night and tries to buy them. Rick refuses to sell, telling Laszlo to ask his wife why. They are interrupted when Strasser leads a group of German officers in singing "Die Wacht am Rhein". Laszlo orders the house band to play "La Marseillaise". When the bandleader looks to Rick, the latter nods, and Laszlo begins to sing. Patriotic fervor grips the crowd, and everyone joins in, drowning out the Germans. Afterwards, Strasser has Renault close the club on a flimsy pretext.

Later, Ilsa confronts Rick in the deserted café; when he refuses to give her the letters, she threatens him with a gun but then confesses that she still loves him. She explains that when they met and fell in love in Paris in 1940, she believed her husband had been killed attempting to escape from a concentration camp. Then she learned that Laszlo was alive and hiding near Paris. She left Rick without explanation to nurse her sick husband. Rick's bitterness dissolves. He agrees to help, letting her believe she will stay with him when Laszlo leaves. When Laszlo unexpectedly shows up, having narrowly escaped a police raid on a Resistance meeting, Rick has waiter Carl spirit Ilsa away. Laszlo, aware of Rick's love for Ilsa, tries to persuade him to use the letters to take her to safety.
When the police arrest Laszlo on a trumped-up charge, Rick persuades Renault to release him by promising to set him up for a much more serious crime: possession of the letters. To allay Renault's suspicions, Rick explains that he and Ilsa will use the letters to leave for America. When Renault tries to arrest Laszlo as arranged, however, Rick forces him at gunpoint to assist in their escape. At the last moment, Rick makes Ilsa board the plane to Lisbon with Laszlo, telling her that she would regret it if she stayed, "Maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow, but soon and for the rest of your life." Strasser, tipped off by Renault, drives up alone. When Strasser attempts to stop the plane, Rick shoots him dead. Policemen arrive. Renault pauses, then orders them to "round up the usual suspects." He suggests to Rick that they join the Free French in Brazzaville. As they walk away into the fog, Rick says, "Louis, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship."


== Cast ==
The play's cast consisted of 16 speaking parts and several extras; the film script enlarged it to 22 speaking parts and hundreds of extras. The cast is notably international: only three of the credited actors were born in the United States (Bogart, Dooley Wilson, and Joy Page). The top-billed actors are:
Humphrey Bogart as Rick Blaine
Ingrid Bergman as Ilsa Lund. Bergman's official website calls Ilsa her "most famous and enduring role". The Swedish actress's Hollywood debut in Intermezzo had been well received, but her subsequent films were not major successes until Casablanca. Film critic Roger Ebert called her "luminous", and commented on the chemistry between her and Bogart: "she paints his face with her eyes". Other actresses considered for the role of Ilsa included Ann Sheridan, Hedy Lamarr, Luise Rainer, and Michèle Morgan. Producer Hal Wallis obtained the services of Bergman, who was contracted to David O. Selznick, by lending Olivia de Havilland in exchange.
Paul Henreid as Victor Laszlo. Henreid, an Austrian actor who had emigrated in 1935, was reluctant to take the role (it "set [him] as a stiff forever", according to Pauline Kael), until he was promised top billing along with Bogart and Bergman. Henreid did not get on well with his fellow actors; he considered Bogart "a mediocre actor"; Bergman called Henreid a "prima donna".The second-billed actors are:

Claude Rains as Captain Louis Renault
Conrad Veidt as Major Heinrich Strasser. Veidt was a refugee German actor who had fled the Nazis with his Jewish wife, but frequently played Nazis in American films. He was the highest paid member of the cast despite his second billing.
Sydney Greenstreet as Signor Ferrari
Peter Lorre as Signor UgarteAlso credited are:

Curt Bois as the pickpocket. Bois had one of the longest careers in cinema, spanning over 80 years.
Leonid Kinskey as Sascha, the Russian bartender infatuated with Yvonne. Kinskey told Aljean Harmetz, author of Round Up the Usual Suspects: The Making of Casablanca, that he was cast because he was Bogart's drinking buddy. He was not the first choice for the role; he replaced Leo Mostovoy, who was deemed not funny enough.
Madeleine Lebeau as Yvonne, Rick's soon-discarded girlfriend. Lebeau was a French refugee who had left Nazi-occupied Europe with her husband Marcel Dalio, who was a fellow Casablanca performer. She was the last surviving cast member until her death on May 1, 2016.
Joy Page, the step-daughter of studio head Jack L. Warner, as Annina Brandel, the young Bulgarian refugee
John Qualen as Berger, Laszlo's Resistance contact
S. Z. Sakall (credited as S. K. Sakall) as Carl, the waiter
Dooley Wilson as Sam. Wilson was one of the few American-born members of the cast. A drummer, he had to fake playing the piano. Even after shooting had been completed, producer Wallis considered dubbing over Wilson's voice for the songs.Notable uncredited actors are:

Marcel Dalio as Emil the croupier. Dalio had been a star in French cinema, appearing in Jean Renoir's La Grande Illusion and La Règle du Jeu
Helmut Dantine as Jan Brandel, the Bulgarian roulette player married to Annina Brandel
Gregory Gaye as the German banker who is refused entry to the casino by Rick
Torben Meyer as the Dutch banker who runs "the second largest banking house in Amsterdam"
Corinna Mura as the guitar player who sings "Tango Delle Rose" (or "Tango de la Rosa") and later accompanies the crowd on "La Marseillaise"
Frank Puglia as a Moroccan rug merchant
Richard Ryen as Colonel Heinze, Strasser's aide
Dan Seymour as Abdul the doorman
Gerald Oliver Smith as the Englishman whose wallet is stolen
Norma Varden as the Englishwoman whose husband has his wallet stolenMuch of the emotional impact of the film, for the audience in 1942, has been attributed to the large proportion of European exiles and refugees who were extras or played minor roles (in addition to leading actors Paul Henreid, Conrad Veidt and Peter Lorre), such as Louis V. Arco, Trude Berliner, Ilka Grünig, Ludwig Stössel, Hans Heinrich von Twardowski, and Wolfgang Zilzer. A witness to the filming of the "duel of the anthems" sequence said he saw many of the actors crying and "realized that they were all real refugees". Harmetz argues that they "brought to a dozen small roles in Casablanca an understanding and a desperation that could never have come from Central Casting". Even though many were Jewish or refugees from the Nazis (or both), they were frequently cast as Nazis in various war films, because of their accents.
Jack Benny may have appeared in an unbilled cameo, as was claimed by a contemporary newspaper advertisement and in the Casablanca press book. When asked in his column "Movie Answer Man", critic Roger Ebert first replied, "It looks something like him. That's all I can say." In a later column, he responded to a follow-up commenter, "I think you're right. The Jack Benny Fan Club can feel vindicated".


== Writing ==
The film was based on Murray Burnett and Joan Alison's unproduced play Everybody Comes to Rick's. The Warner Bros. story analyst who read the play, Stephen Karnot, called it (approvingly) "sophisticated hokum" and story editor Irene Diamond, who had discovered the script on a trip to New York in 1941, convinced Hal Wallis to buy the rights in January 1942 for $20,000 (equivalent to $310,000 in 2022), the most anyone in Hollywood had ever paid for an unproduced play. The project was renamed Casablanca, apparently in imitation of the 1938 hit Algiers. Casablanca also shares many narrative and thematic similarities with Algiers (1938), which itself is a remake of the acclaimed 1937 French film Pépé le Moko, directed and co-written by Julien Duvivier.The original play was inspired by a trip to Europe made by Murray Burnett and his wife in 1938, during which they visited Vienna shortly after the Anschluss and were affected by the antisemitism they saw. In the south of France, they went to a nightclub that had a multinational clientele, among them many exiles and refugees, and the prototype of Sam. In The Guardian, Paul Fairclough wrote that Cinema Vox in Tangier "was Africa's biggest when it opened in 1935, with 2,000 seats and a retractable roof. As Tangier was in Spanish territory [sic], the theatre's wartime bar heaved with spies, refugees and underworld hoods, securing its place in cinematic history as the inspiration for Rick's Cafe in Casablanca." The scene of the singing of "La Marseillaise" in the bar is attributed by the film scholar Julian Jackson as an adaptation of a similar scene from Jean Renoir's film La Grande Illusion five years prior.The first writers assigned to the script were twins Julius and Philip Epstein who, against the wishes of Warner Bros., left at Frank Capra's request early in 1942 to work on the Why We Fight series in Washington, D.C. While they were gone, the other credited writer, Howard Koch, was assigned; he produced thirty to forty pages. When the Epstein brothers returned after about a month, they were reassigned to Casablanca and—contrary to what Koch claimed in two published books—his work was not used. The Epstein brothers and Koch never worked in the same room at the same time during the writing of the script. In the final budget for the film, the Epsteins were paid $30,416, (equivalent to $427,021 in 2022) and Koch earned $4,200 (equivalent to $59,783 in 2022).In the play, the Ilsa character is an American named Lois Meredith; she does not meet Laszlo until after her relationship with Rick in Paris has ended. Rick is a lawyer. The play (set entirely in the cafe) ends with Rick sending Lois and Laszlo to the airport. To make Rick's motivation more believable, Wallis, Curtiz, and the screenwriters decided to set the film before the attack on Pearl Harbor.
The possibility was discussed of Laszlo being killed in Casablanca, allowing Rick and Ilsa to leave together, but as Casey Robinson wrote to Wallis before filming began, the ending of the film "set up for a swell twist when Rick sends her away on the plane with Laszlo. For now, in doing so, he is not just solving a love triangle. He is forcing the girl to live up to the idealism of her nature, forcing her to carry on with the work that in these days is far more important than the love of two little people." It was certainly impossible for Ilsa to leave Laszlo for Rick, as the Motion Picture Production Code forbade showing a woman leaving her husband for another man. The concern was not whether Ilsa would leave with Laszlo, but how this outcome would be engineered. According to Julius Epstein, he and Philip were driving when they simultaneously came up with the idea for Renault to order the roundup of "the usual suspects", after which all the details needed for resolution of the story, including the farewell between Bergman and "a suddenly noble Bogart", were rapidly worked out.The uncredited Casey Robinson assisted with three weeks of rewrites, including contributing the series of meetings between Rick and Ilsa in the cafe. Koch highlighted the political and melodramatic elements, and Curtiz seems to have favored the romantic parts, insisting on retaining the Paris flashbacks.In a telegram to film editor Owen Marks on August 7, 1942, Wallis suggested two possible final lines of dialogue for Rick: "Louis, I might have known you'd mix your patriotism with a little larceny" or "Louis, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship". Two weeks later, Wallis settled on the latter, which Bogart was recalled to dub a month after shooting had finished.Bogart's line "Here's looking at you, kid", said four times, was not in the draft screenplays, but has been attributed to a comment he made to Bergman as she played poker with her English coach and hairdresser between takes.Despite the many writers, the film has what Ebert describes as a "wonderfully unified and consistent" script. Koch later claimed it was the tension between his own approach and Curtiz's that had accounted for this. "Surprisingly, these disparate approaches somehow meshed, and perhaps it was partly this tug of war between Curtiz and me that gave the film a certain balance." Julius Epstein later noted the screenplay contained "more corn than in the states of Kansas and Iowa combined. But when corn works, there's nothing better".The film ran into some trouble with Joseph Breen of the Production Code Administration (the Hollywood self-censorship body), who opposed the suggestions that Captain Renault extorted sexual favors from visa applicants, and that Rick and Ilsa had slept together. Extensive changes were made, with several lines of dialogue removed or altered. All direct references to sex were deleted; Renault's selling of visas for sex, and Rick and Ilsa's previous sexual relationship were implied elliptically rather than referenced explicitly. Also, in the original script, when Sam plays "As Time Goes By", Rick exclaims, "What the —— are you playing?" This line was altered to "Sam, I thought I told you never to play ..." to conform to Breen's objection to an implied swear word.


== Production ==
Although an initial filming date was selected for April 10, 1942, delays led to production starting on May 25. Filming was completed on August 3. It went $75,000 over budget for a total cost of $1,039,000 (equivalent to $14,789,000 in 2022), above average for the time. Unusually, the film was shot in sequence, mainly because only the first half of the script was ready when filming began.The entire picture was shot in the studio except for the sequence showing Strasser's arrival and close-ups of the Lockheed Electra (filmed at Van Nuys Airport) and a few short clips of stock footage views of Paris. The street used for the exterior shots had recently been built for another film, The Desert Song, and redressed for the Paris flashbacks.
The film critic Roger Ebert called Wallis the "key creative force" for his attention to the details of production (down to insisting on a real parrot in the Blue Parrot bar).The difference between Bergman's and Bogart's height caused some problems. She was two inches (5 cm) taller than Bogart, and claimed Curtiz had Bogart stand on blocks or sit on cushions in their scenes together.Later, there were plans for a further scene, showing Rick, Renault and a detachment of Free French soldiers on a ship, to incorporate the Allies' 1942 invasion of North Africa. It proved too difficult to get Claude Rains for the shoot, and the scene was finally abandoned after David O. Selznick judged "it would be a terrible mistake to change the ending".The background of the final scene, which shows a Lockheed Model 12 Electra Junior airplane with personnel walking around it, was staged using little person extras and a proportionate cardboard plane. Fog was used to mask the model's unconvincing appearance.


=== Direction ===
Wallis's first choice for director was William Wyler, but he was unavailable, so Wallis turned to his close friend Michael Curtiz. Roger Ebert has commented that in Casablanca "very few shots ...are memorable as shots", as Curtiz wanted images to express the story rather than to stand alone. He contributed relatively little to development of the plot. Casey Robinson said Curtiz "knew nothing whatever about story ...he saw it in pictures, and you supplied the stories".Critic Andrew Sarris called the film "the most decisive exception to the auteur theory", of which Sarris was the most prominent proponent in the United States. Aljean Harmetz has responded, "...nearly every Warner Bros. picture was an exception to the auteur theory". Other critics give more credit to Curtiz. Sidney Rosenzweig, in his study of the director's work, sees the film as a typical example of Curtiz's highlighting of moral dilemmas.Some of the second unit montages, such as the opening sequence of the refugee trail and the invasion of France, were directed by Don Siegel.


=== Cinematography ===
The cinematographer was Arthur Edeson, a veteran who had previously shot The Maltese Falcon and Frankenstein. Particular attention was paid to photographing Bergman. She was shot mainly from her preferred left side, often with a softening gauze filter and with catch lights to make her eyes sparkle; the whole effect was designed to make her face seem "ineffably sad and tender and nostalgic". Bars of shadow across the characters and in the background variously imply imprisonment, the crucifix, the symbol of the Free French Forces and emotional turmoil. Dark film noir and expressionist lighting was used in several scenes, particularly towards the end of the picture. Rosenzweig argues these shadow and lighting effects are classic elements of the Curtiz style, along with the fluid camera work and the use of the environment as a framing device.


== Soundtrack ==
The music was written by Max Steiner, who wrote scores for King Kong and Gone with the Wind. The song "As Time Goes By" by Herman Hupfeld had been part of the story from the original play; Steiner wanted to write his own composition to replace it, but Bergman had already cut her hair short for her next role (María in For Whom the Bell Tolls) and could not reshoot the scenes that incorporated the song, so Steiner based the entire score on it and "La Marseillaise", the French national anthem, transforming them as leitmotifs to reflect changing moods. Even though Steiner disliked "As Time Goes By", he admitted in a 1943 interview that it "must have had something to attract so much attention". Dooley Wilson, who played Sam, was a drummer but not a pianist, so his piano playing was performed by Jean Plummer.Particularly memorable is the "duel of the anthems" between Strasser and Laszlo at Rick's cafe. In the soundtrack, "La Marseillaise" is played by a full orchestra. Originally, the opposing piece for this iconic sequence was to be the "Horst Wessel Lied", a Nazi anthem but this was still under international copyright in non-Allied countries. Instead "Die Wacht am Rhein" was used. The "Deutschlandlied", the national anthem of Germany, is used several times in minor mode as a leitmotif for the German threat, e.g. in the scene in Paris as it is announced that the German army will reach Paris the next day. It is featured in the final scene, giving way to "La Marseillaise" after Strasser is shot.Other songs include:

"It Had to Be You", music by Isham Jones, lyrics by Gus Kahn
"Shine", music by Ford Dabney, lyrics by Cecil Mack and Lew Brown
"Avalon", music and lyrics by Al Jolson, Buddy DeSylva and Vincent Rose
"Perfidia", by Alberto Domínguez
"The Very Thought of You", by Ray Noble
"Knock on Wood", music by M. K. Jerome, lyrics by Jack Scholl, the only original song.
"I'm Just Wild About Harry", by Eubie Blake
"Heaven Can Wait", by Jimmy Van Heusen
"Parlez-moi d'amour", by Jean Lenoir
"Love for Sale", by Cole PorterVery few films in the early 1940s had portions of the soundtrack released on 78 rpm records, and Casablanca was no exception. In 1997, almost 55 years after the film's premiere, Turner Entertainment in collaboration with Rhino Records issued the film's first original soundtrack album for release on compact disc, including original songs and music, spoken dialogue, and alternate takes.The piano featured in the Paris flashback sequences was sold in New York City on December 14, 2012, at Sotheby's for more than $600,000 to an anonymous bidder. The piano Sam "plays" in Rick's Café Américain, put up for auction with other film memorabilia by Turner Classic Movies at Bonhams in New York on November 24, 2014, sold for $3.4 million.


== Release ==
Although an initial release date was anticipated for early 1943, the film premiered at the Hollywood Theater in New York City on November 26, 1942, to capitalize on Operation Torch (the Allied invasion of French North Africa) and the capture of Casablanca. It went into general release on January 23, 1943, to take advantage of the Casablanca Conference, a high-level meeting in the city between British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and American President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The Office of War Information prevented screening of the film to troops in North Africa, believing it would cause resentment among Vichy supporters in the region.


=== Irish and German cuts ===
On March 19, 1943, the film was banned in Ireland for infringing on the Emergency Powers Order preserving wartime neutrality, by portraying Vichy France and Nazi Germany in a "sinister light". It was passed with cuts on June 15, 1945, shortly after the EPO was lifted. The cuts were made to dialogue between Rick and Ilsa referring to their love affair. A version with only one scene cut was passed on July 16, 1974; Irish national broadcaster RTÉ inquired about showing the film on TV, but found it still required a dialogue cut to Ilsa expressing her love for Rick.Warner Brothers released a heavily edited version of Casablanca in West Germany in 1952. All scenes with Nazis were removed, along with most references to World War II. Important plot points were altered when the dialogue was dubbed into German. Victor Laszlo was no longer a Resistance fighter who escaped from a Nazi concentration camp. Instead, he became a Norwegian atomic physicist who was being pursued by Interpol after he "broke out of jail". The West German version was 25 minutes shorter than the original cut. A German version of Casablanca with the original plot was not released until 1975.


== Reception ==


=== Initial response ===
Casablanca received "consistently good reviews". Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote, "The Warners ... have a picture which makes the spine tingle and the heart take a leap." He applauded the combination of "sentiment, humor and pathos with taut melodrama and bristling intrigue." Crowther noted its "devious convolutions of the plot" and praised the screenplay quality as "of the best" and the cast's performances as "all of the first order".The trade paper Variety commended the film's "combination of fine performances, engrossing story and neat direction" and the "variety of moods, action, suspense, comedy and drama that makes Casablanca an A-1 entry at the b.o." The review observed that the "[f]ilm is splendid anti-Axis propaganda, particularly inasmuch as the propaganda is strictly a by-product of the principal action and contributes to it instead of getting in the way". Variety also applauded the performances of Bergman and Henreid and noted, "Bogart, as might be expected, is more at ease as the bitter and cynical operator of a joint than as a lover, but handles both assignments with superb finesse."Some reviews were less enthusiastic. The New Yorker rated Casablanca only "pretty tolerable" and said it was "not quite up to Across the Pacific, Bogart's last spyfest".At the 1,500-seat Hollywood Theater, the film grossed $255,000 over ten weeks (equivalent to $3.6 million in 2022). In its initial American release, Casablanca was a substantial but not spectacular box-office success, earning $3.7 million (equivalent to $53 million in 2022). A 50th-anniversary re-release grossed $1.5 million in 1992. According to Warner Bros. records, the film earned $3,398,000 domestically and $3,461,000 in foreign markets.


=== Enduring popularity ===
In the decades since its release, the film has grown in reputation. Murray Burnett called it "true yesterday, true today, true tomorrow". By 1955, the film had brought in $6.8 million, making it the third-most-successful of Warners' wartime movies, behind Shine On, Harvest Moon and This Is the Army. On April 21, 1957, the Brattle Theater of Cambridge, Massachusetts, showed the film as part of a season of old movies. It proved so popular that a tradition began in which Casablanca would be screened during the week of final exams at Harvard University. Todd Gitlin, a professor of sociology who had attended one of these screenings, has said that the experience was "the acting out of my own personal rite of passage". The tradition helped the film remain popular while other films that had been famous in the 1940s have faded from popular memory. By 1977, Casablanca had become the most frequently broadcast film on American television.Ingrid Bergman's portrayal of Ilsa Lund in Casablanca became one of her best-known roles. In later years she said, "I feel about Casablanca that it has a life of its own. There is something mystical about it. It seems to have filled a need, a need that was there before the film, a need that the film filled."On the film's 50th anniversary, the Los Angeles Times called Casablanca's great strength "the purity of its Golden Age Hollywoodness [and] the enduring craftsmanship of its resonantly hokey dialogue". Bob Strauss wrote in the newspaper that the film achieved a "near-perfect entertainment balance" of comedy, romance, and suspense.Roger Ebert, wrote of Casablanca in 1992, "There are greater movies. More profound movies. Movies of greater artistic vision or artistic originality or political significance. ... But [it is] one of the movies we treasure the most ... This is a movie that has transcended the ordinary categories." In his opinion, the film is popular because "the people in it are all so good" and it is "a wonderful gem". Ebert said that he had never heard of a negative review of the film, even though individual elements can be criticized, citing unrealistic special effects and the stiff character of Laszlo as portrayed by Paul Henreid.Critic and film historian Leonard Maltin considers Casablanca "the best Hollywood movie of all time".According to Rudy Behlmer, the character of Rick is "not a hero ... not a bad guy" because he does what is necessary to appease the authorities and "sticks his neck out for nobody". Behlmer feels that the other characters are "not cut and dried" and come into their goodness over the course of the film. Renault begins as a collaborator with the Nazis who extorts sexual favors from refugees and has Ugarte killed. Even Ilsa, the least active of the main characters, is "caught in the emotional struggle" over which man she really loves. By the end, however, "everybody is sacrificing". Behlmer also emphasized the variety in the picture. "It's a blend of drama, melodrama, comedy [and] intrigue."Scott Tobias, writing for The Guardian on the film's 80th anniversary, calls it the "the jewel of Hollywood’s Golden Age", and the best example of the system of film-making working: due not to a single artistic genius but a combination of talented writing, set design, music, casting, supporting characters, and production.A few reviewers have expressed reservations. To Pauline Kael, "It's far from a great film, but it has a special appealingly schlocky romanticism ..." Umberto Eco wrote that "by any strict critical standards ... Casablanca is a very mediocre film". He viewed the changes that the characters manifest as inconsistent rather than complex. "It is a comic strip, a hotchpotch, low on psychological credibility, and with little continuity in its dramatic effects." However, he added that because of the presence of multiple archetypes that allow "the power of Narrative in its natural state without Art intervening to discipline it", it is a film reaching "Homeric depths" as a "phenomenon worthy of awe".On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 99% of 127 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 9.4/10. The website's consensus reads, "An undisputed masterpiece and perhaps Hollywood's quintessential statement on love and romance, Casablanca has only improved with age, boasting career-defining performances from Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman." On Metacritic, the film has a perfect score of 100 out of 100, based on 18 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". It is one of the few films in the site's history to achieve a perfect aggregate score.In the November/December 1982 issue of Film Comment, Chuck Ross wrote that he retyped the Casablanca screenplay, reverting the title to Everybody Comes to Rick's and changing the name of Sam the piano player to Dooley (after Dooley Wilson, who played the character), and submitted it to 217 agencies. The majority of agencies returned the script unread (often because of policies regarding unsolicited screenplays) or did not respond. However, of those which did respond, only 33 specifically recognized it as Casablanca. Eight others observed that it was similar to Casablanca, and 41 agencies rejected the screenplay outright, offering comments such as "Too much dialogue, not enough exposition, the story line was weak, and in general didn't hold my interest." Three agencies offered to represent the screenplay, and one suggested turning it into a novel.


=== Influence on later works ===
Many subsequent films have drawn on elements of Casablanca. Passage to Marseille (1944) reunited actors Bogart, Rains, Greenstreet, and Lorre and director Curtiz in 1944, and there are similarities between Casablanca and a later Bogart film, To Have and Have Not (also 1944). Parodies have included the Marx Brothers' A Night in Casablanca (1946), Neil Simon's The Cheap Detective (1978), and Out Cold (2001). Indirectly, it provided the title for the 1995 neo-noir film The Usual Suspects. Woody Allen's Play It Again, Sam (1972) appropriated Bogart's Casablanca character as the fantasy mentor for Allen's character.The film was a plot device in the science-fiction television movie Overdrawn at the Memory Bank (1983), based on John Varley's story. It was referred to in Terry Gilliam's dystopian Brazil (1985). Warner Bros. produced its own parody in the homage Carrotblanca, a 1995 Bugs Bunny cartoon. The film critic Roger Ebert pointed out the plot of the film Barb Wire (1996) was identical to that of Casablanca. In Casablanca, a novella by Argentine writer Edgar Brau, the protagonist somehow wanders into Rick's Café Américain and listens to a strange tale related by Sam. The 2016 musical film La La Land contains allusions to Casablanca in the imagery, dialogue, and plot. Robert Zemeckis, director of Allied (2016), which is also set in 1942 Casablanca, studied the film to capture the city's elegance. The 2017 Moroccan drama film Razzia, directed by Nabil Ayouch, is mostly set in the city of Casablanca, and its characters frequently discuss the 1942 film.


=== Awards and honors ===
Because of its November 1942 release, the New York Film Critics decided to include the film in its 1942 award season for best picture. Casablanca lost to In Which We Serve. However, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences stated that since the film went into national release at the beginning of 1943, it would be included in that year's nominations. Casablanca was nominated for eight Academy Awards, and won three.

As Bogart stepped out of his car at the awards ceremony, "the crowd surged forward, almost engulfing him and his wife, Mayo Methot. It took 12 police officers to rescue the two, and a red-faced, startled, yet smiling Bogart heard a chorus of cries of 'good luck' and 'here's looking at you, kid' as he was rushed into the theater".When the award for Best Picture was announced, producer Hal B. Wallis got up to accept, but studio head Jack L. Warner rushed up to the stage "with a broad, flashing smile and a look of great self-satisfaction," Wallis later recalled. "I couldn't believe it was happening. Casablanca had been my creation; Jack had absolutely nothing to do with it. As the audience gasped, I tried to get out of the row of seats and into the aisle, but the entire Warner family sat blocking me. I had no alternative but to sit down again, humiliated and furious ... Almost forty years later, I still haven't recovered from the shock." This incident led Wallis to leave Warner Bros. in April.In 1989, the film was one of the first 25 films selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2005, it was named one of the 100 greatest films of the last 80 years by Time magazine (the selected films were not ranked). Bright Lights Film Journal stated in 2007, "It is one of those rare films from Hollywood's Golden Age which has managed to transcend its era to entertain generations of moviegoers ... Casablanca provides twenty-first-century Americans with an oasis of hope in a desert of arbitrary cruelty and senseless violence."The film also ranked at number 28 on Empire's list of the 100 Greatest Movies of All Time, which said, "Love, honour, thrills, wisecracks and a hit tune are among the attractions, which also include a perfect supporting cast of villains, sneaks, thieves, refugees and bar staff. But it's Bogart and Bergman's show, entering immortality as screen lovers reunited only to part. The irrefutible [sic] proof that great movies are accidents." Screenwriting teacher Robert McKee maintains that the script is "the greatest screenplay of all time". In 2006, the Writers Guild of America, West agreed, voting it the best ever in its list of the 101 greatest screenplays.The film has been selected by the American Film Institute for many of their lists of important American films:


== Interpretation ==
Casablanca has been subjected to many readings; semioticians account for the film's popularity by claiming that its inclusion of stereotypes paradoxically strengthens the film. Umberto Eco wrote:

Thus Casablanca is not just one film. It is many films, an anthology. Made haphazardly, it probably made itself, if not actually against the will of its authors and actors, then at least beyond their control. And this is the reason it works, in spite of aesthetic theories and theories of film making. For in it there unfolds with almost telluric force the power of Narrative in its natural state, without Art intervening to discipline it ... When all the archetypes burst in shamelessly, we reach Homeric depths. Two clichés make us laugh. A hundred clichés move us. For we sense dimly that the clichés are talking among themselves, and celebrating a reunion.
Eco also singled out sacrifice as a theme: "the myth of sacrifice runs through the whole film". It was this theme that resonated with a wartime audience who were reassured by the idea that painful sacrifice and going off to war could be romantic gestures done for the greater good.Koch also considered the film a political allegory. Rick is compared to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who gambled "on the odds of going to war until circumstance and his own submerged nobility force him to close his casino (partisan politics) and commit himself—first by financing the Side of Right and then by fighting for it". The connection is reinforced by the film's title, which means "white house".Harvey Greenberg presents a Freudian reading in his The Movies on Your Mind, in which the transgressions that prevent Rick from returning to the United States constitute an Oedipus complex, which is resolved only when Rick begins to identify with the father figure of Laszlo and the cause that he represents. Sidney Rosenzweig argues that such readings are reductive and that the most important aspect of the film is its ambiguity, above all in the central character of Rick; he cites the different names that each character gives Rick (Richard, Ricky, Mr. Rick, Herr Rick and boss) as evidence of the different meanings that he has for each person.


== Home media ==
Casablanca was initially released on Betamax and VHS by Magnetic Video and later by CBS/Fox Video (as United Artists owned the distribution rights at the time). In 1989, the Criterion Collection released a Laserdisc release sourced from a nitrate print that includes supplements such as an audio commentary by Ronald Haver, a treatment for an unreleased sequel and wartime footage of the city of Casablanca. Criterion would issue a CLV version of this in 1991 with only the film and commentary. It was next released on laserdisc in 1991, and on VHS in 1992—both from MGM/UA Home Entertainment (distributing for Turner Entertainment Co.), which at the time was distributed by Warner Home Video. It was first released on DVD in 1998 by MGM, containing the trailer and a making-of featurette (Warner Home Video reissued the DVD in 2000). A subsequent two-disc special edition, containing an audio commentary by Roger Ebert, documentaries, Carrotblanca and a newly remastered visual and audio presentation, was released in 2003.An HD DVD was released on November 14, 2006, containing the same special features as the 2003 DVD. Reviewers were impressed with the new high-definition transfer of the film.A Blu-ray release with new special features came out on December 2, 2008; it is also available on DVD. The Blu-ray was initially only released as an expensive gift set with a booklet, a luggage tag and other assorted gift-type items. It was eventually released as a stand-alone Blu-ray in September 2009. On March 27, 2012, Warner released a new 70th Anniversary Ultimate Collector's Edition Blu-ray/DVD combo set. It includes a brand-new 4K restoration and new bonus material. This 4K restoration was completed at Warner Bros. Digital Imaging from a nitrate print, because the original negative no longer exists.The film was also released on Ultra HD Blu-ray in November 8, 2022.


== Remakes and unrealized sequels ==
Almost from the moment Casablanca became a hit, talk began of producing a sequel. One titled Brazzaville (in the final scene, Renault recommends fleeing to that Free French-held city) was planned, but never produced. A newspaper article at the time mentioned that Bogart and Greenstreet "will continue their characterizations from the first film, and it's likely that Geraldine Fitzgerald will have an important role". Since then, no studio has seriously considered filming a sequel or outright remake.
François Truffaut refused an invitation to remake the film in 1974, citing its cult status among American students as his reason. Attempts to recapture the magic of Casablanca in other settings, such as Caboblanco (1980), "a South American-set retooling of Casablanca", and Havana (1990) have been poorly received.
Stories of a Casablanca remake or sequel nonetheless persist. In 2008, Madonna was reported to be pursuing a remake set in modern-day Iraq. In 2012, both The Daily Telegraph and Entertainment Weekly reported on efforts by Cass Warner, granddaughter of Harry Warner and friend of the late Howard Koch, to produce a sequel featuring the search by Rick Blaine and Ilsa Lund's illegitimate son for the whereabouts of his biological father.


== Adaptations ==
On radio, there were several adaptations of the film. The two best-known are a thirty-minute adaptation on The Screen Guild Theater on April 26, 1943, starring Bogart, Bergman, and Henreid, and an hour-long version on the Lux Radio Theater on January 24, 1944, featuring Alan Ladd as Rick, Hedy Lamarr as Ilsa, and John Loder as Laszlo. Two other thirty-minute adaptations were aired, one on Philip Morris Playhouse on September 3, 1943, and the other on Theater of Romance on December 19, 1944, in which Dooley Wilson reprised his role as Sam.On television, there have been two short-lived series based upon Casablanca, both sharing the title. The first Casablanca aired on ABC as part of the wheel series Warner Bros. Presents in hour-long episodes from 1955 to 1956. It was a Cold War espionage program set contemporaneously with its production, and starred Charles McGraw as Rick and Marcel Dalio, who had played Emil the croupier in the movie, as the police chief. The second Casablanca, broadcast on NBC in April 1983, starred David Soul as Rick and was canceled after three weeks.The novel As Time Goes By, written by Michael Walsh and published in 1998, was authorized by Warner. The novel picks up where the film leaves off, and also tells of Rick's mysterious past in America. The book met with little success. David Thomson provided an unofficial sequel in his 1985 novel Suspects.Julius Epstein made two attempts to turn the film into a Broadway musical, in 1951 and 1967, but neither made it to the stage. The original play, Everybody Comes to Rick's, was produced in Newport, Rhode Island, in August 1946, and again in London in April 1991, but met with no success. The film was adapted into a musical by the Takarazuka Revue, an all-female Japanese musical theater company, and ran from November 2009 through February 2010.CasablancaBox, written by Sara Farrington and directed by Reid Farrington, premiered in New York in 2017 and was an imagined "making of" the film. It was nominated for two 2017 Drama Desk awards, Unique Theatrical Experience and Outstanding Projection Design. The New York Times described it as "a brave, almost foolhardy undertaking, presenting the backstage drama during the making of Casablanca".


== Colorization ==
Casablanca was part of the film colorization controversy of the 1980s, when a colorized version aired on the television network WTBS. In 1984, MGM/UA hired Color Systems Technology to colorize the film for $180,000. When Ted Turner of Turner Broadcasting System purchased MGM/UA's film library two years later, he canceled the request, before contracting American Film Technologies (AFT) in 1988. AFT completed the colorization in two months at a cost of $450,000. Turner later reacted to criticism of the colorization, saying, "[Casablanca] is one of a handful of films that really doesn't have to be colorized. I did it because I wanted to. All I'm trying to do is protect my investment."The Library of Congress deemed that the color change differed so much from the original film that it gave a new copyright to Turner Entertainment. When the colorized film debuted on WTBS, it was watched by three million viewers, not making the top-ten viewed cable shows for the week. Although Jack Matthews of the Los Angeles Times called the finished product "state of the art", it was mostly met with negative critical reception. It was briefly available on home video. Gary Edgerton, writing for the Journal of Popular Film & Television criticized the colorization, stating that "Casablanca in color ended up being much blander in appearance and, overall, much less visually interesting than its 1942 predecessor." Bogart's son, Stephen, said, "if you're going to colorize Casablanca, why not put arms on the Venus de Milo?"


== Inaccuracies and a misquote ==
Several unfounded rumors and misconceptions have grown up around the film, one being that Ronald Reagan was originally chosen to play Rick. This originated in a press release issued by the studio early on in the film's development. By that time the studio already knew that he was going into the Army and he was never seriously considered. George Raft claimed that he had turned down the lead role but studio records make it clear that Wallis was committed to Bogart from the start.Another story is that the actors did not know until the last day of shooting how the film was to end. Koch later acknowledged:

When we began, we didn't have a finished script ... Ingrid Bergman came to me and said, "Which man should I love more ...?" I said to her, "I don't know ... play them both evenly." You see we didn't have an ending, so we didn't know what was going to happen!

While rewrites did occur during filming, Aljean Harmetz's examination of the scripts has shown that many of the key scenes were shot after Bergman knew how the film would end; any confusion was, according to critic Roger Ebert, "emotional", not "factual".The film has several logical flaws, one being the two "letters of transit" that enable their bearers to leave Vichy French territory. Ugarte says the letters had been signed by (depending on the listener) either Vichy General Weygand or Free French General de Gaulle. The French subtitles on the official DVD read Weygand; the English ones specify de Gaulle. Weygand had been the Vichy delegate-general for the North African colonies until November 1941, a month before the film is set. De Gaulle was the head of the Free French government in exile, so a letter signed by him would have provided no benefit. The letters were invented as a MacGuffin by Joan Alison for the original play and never questioned.In the same vein, though Laszlo asserts that the Nazis cannot arrest him, saying, "This is still unoccupied France; any violation of neutrality would reflect on Captain Renault", Ebert points out, "It makes no sense that he could walk around freely. ... He would be arrested on sight." No uniformed German troops were stationed in Casablanca during World War II, and neither American nor French troops occupied Berlin in 1918.A line closely associated with Casablanca—"Play it again, Sam"—is not spoken in the film. When Ilsa first enters the Café Américain, she spots Sam and asks him, "Play it once, Sam, for old times' sake." After he feigns ignorance, she responds, "Play it, Sam. Play 'As Time Goes By'." Later that night, alone with Sam, Rick says, "You played it for her, you can play it for me", and "If she can stand it, I can! Play it!"


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Behlmer, Rudy (1985). Inside Warner Bros. (1935–1951). London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-79242-0.
Casablanca (Two-Disc Special Edition DVD) (2003) (with audio commentaries by Roger Ebert and Rudy Behlmer and documentary Casablanca 50th Anniversary Special: You Must Remember This, narrated by Lauren Bacall).
Epstein, Julius J. (1994). Casablanca. Imprenta Glorias. OCLC 31873886.
Francisco, Charles (1980). You Must Remember This: The Filming of Casablanca. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-977058-6.
Gardner, Gerald (1988). The Censorship Papers: Movie Censorship Letters from the Hays Office, 1934 to 1968. New York: Dodd Mead. ISBN 978-0-396-08903-2.
Harmetz, Aljean (1992). Round Up the Usual Suspects: The Making of Casablanca – Bogart, Bergman, and World War II. Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-56282-761-8.
Isenberg, Noah (2017). We'll Always Have Casablanca: The Life, Legend, and Afterlife of Hollywood's Most Beloved Movie. New York: W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-24312-3.
Koch, Howard (1973). Casablanca: Script and Legend. The Overlook Press. ISBN 978-0-87951-006-0.
Lebo, Harlan (1992). Casablanca: Behind the Scenes. Fireside. ISBN 978-0-671-76981-9.
McGilligan, Pat (1986). Backstory: Interviews with Screenwriters of Hollywood's Golden Age. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-05666-4.
Miller, Frank (1992). Casablanca – As Times Goes By: 50th Anniversary Commemorative. Turner Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-1-878685-14-8.
Robertson, James C. (1993). The Casablanca Man: The Cinema of Michael Curtiz London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-06804-5
Rosenzweig, Sidney (1982). Casablanca and Other Major Films of Michael Curtiz. Ann Arbor, Mich: UofMI Research Press. ISBN 978-0-8357-1304-7.


== External links ==

"Casablanca" essay by Jay Carr at National Film Registry
"Casablanca" essay by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010 ISBN 0826429777, pp. 356–358
Casablanca at IMDb 
Casablanca at AllMovie 
Casablanca at the TCM Movie Database 
Casablanca at the American Film Institute Catalog 
Casablanca at Box Office Mojo 
Casablanca at Rotten Tomatoes Streaming audio

Casablanca on The Screen Guild Theater: April 26, 1943
Casablanca on Lux Radio Theatre: January 24, 1944
Casablanca on Theater of Romance: December 19, 194412 Years a Slave (film)
16th Academy Awards
1942 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
20,000 Years in Sing Sing
35th Saturn Awards
99-es számú bérkocsi
A-list
AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers
AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)
AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions
AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs
AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Breath of Scandal
A Deadly Game (1924 film)
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Million Bid (1927 film)
A Night in Casablanca
A Penny's History
A Soldier's Plaything
A skorpió I.
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Across the Pacific
Al Jolson
Alan Ladd
Alberto Domínguez (composer)
Algiers (film)
Alias the Doctor
Aljean Harmetz
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
Allegory
Allied (film)
Alraune (1918 film)
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Broadcasting Company
American Film Institute
American Heritage (magazine)
An American in Paris (film)
Andrew Sarris
Angels with Dirty Faces
Ann Sheridan
Annie Hall
Anschluss
Antisemitism
Argo (2012 film)
Arms industry
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arthur Edeson
As Time Goes By (novel)
As Time Goes By (song)
Attack on Pearl Harbor
Auteur theory
Avalanche (1923 film)
Avalon (Al Jolson song)
BBC News
Barb Wire (1996 film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Betamax
Bill Gold
Birdman (film)
Black Fury (film)
Blu-ray
Boccaccio (1920 film)
Bonhams
Bosley Crowther
Box Office Mojo
Box office
Brattle Theater
Braveheart
Brazil (1985 film)
Brazzaville
Bright Leaf
Bright Lights (1930 film)
Bright Lights (1935 film)
Bright Lights Film Journal
British Agent
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Broadway musical
Buddy DeSylva
Bugs Bunny
Bulgaria
Burbank, California
Bánk Bán (film)
CBS/Fox Video
CODA (2021 film)
Cab No. 13
Caboblanco
California
Captain Blood (1935 film)
Captains of the Clouds
Captive Souls
Carrotblanca
Cartoon
Casablanca
Casablanca (1955 TV series)
Casablanca (1983 TV series)
Casablanca (novella)
Casablanca Conference
Casey Robinson
Catch light
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Cecil Mack
Central Casting
Chariots of Fire
Charles Krauthammer
Charles McGraw
Charles de Gaulle
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Sun-Times
Cimarron (1931 film)
Cinema Vox (Tangier)
Cinematographer
Claude Rains
Cole Porter
Colorized
Compact disc
Concentration camp
Conrad Veidt
Corinna Mura
Crash (2004 film)
Croupier
Crucifix
Cult film
Curt Bois
Czech resistance to Nazi occupation
DVD
Dan Seymour
Dances with Wolves
Das Spielzeug von Paris
Daughters Courageous
David O. Selznick
David Soul
David Thomson (film critic)
Demon of the Sea
Deutschlandlied
Die Wacht am Rhein
Dive Bomber (film)
Doctor X (film)
Dodge City (film)
Doi (identifier)
Don Siegel
Dooley Wilson
Drama Desk Award
Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Projection Design
Drama Desk Award for Unique Theatrical Experience
Drama film
Driving Miss Daisy
Dwarfism
Dystopia
Earth's Man
Edgar Brau
Elle (magazine)
Emergency Powers Act 1939
Empire (film magazine)
Empire (magazine)
Entertainment Weekly
Eubie Blake
Everybody Comes to Rick's
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Expatriate
Expressionist
Extra (actor)
Fandango Media
Fandom, Inc.
Female (1933 film)
Film Comment
Film colorization
Film editing
Film memorabilia
Film noir
Film rights
Film score
Film still
Flamingo Road (film)
Flashback (literary technique)
For Whom the Bell Tolls (film)
Force of Arms
Ford Dabney
Forrest Gump
Four's a Crowd
Four Daughters
Four Wives
Francis of Assisi (film)
Frank Capra
Frank Puglia
Frankenstein (1931 film)
Franklin D. Roosevelt
François Truffaut
Free French
Free French Forces
French colonial empire
Freudian
From Here to Eternity
Front Page Woman
Gandhi (film)
General Babka (1924 film)
Gentleman's Agreement
George Raft
Gerald Oliver Smith
Geraldine Fitzgerald
German-occupied Europe
Gigi (1958 film)
Glad Rag Doll (film)
Gladiator (2000 film)
Glen Gabbard
God's Gift to Women
Going My Way
Gold Is Where You Find It
Golddigger (film)
Gone with the Wind (film)
Good Time Charley
Good and Evil (film)
Goodbye Again (1933 film)
Government in exile
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Green Book (film)
Gregory Gaye
Guardian.co.uk
Gus Kahn
HD DVD
Hal B. Wallis
Hal Wallis
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hans Heinrich von Twardowski
Harry Warner
Harun al Raschid (film)
Harvard University
Havana (film)
Hearts in Exile (1929 film)
Hedy Lamarr
Helmut Dantine
Here's Looking At You Kid (disambiguation)
Here's looking at you, kid
Herman Hupfeld
Hit parade
Hollywood (film industry)
Homer
Horst Wessel Lied
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Howard Koch (screenwriter)
Humphrey Bogart
I'll See You in My Dreams (1951 film)
I'm Just Wild About Harry
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
Ilka Grünig
In Which We Serve
In the Heat of the Night (film)
IndieWire
Ingrid Bergman
Intermezzo (1939 film)
Iraq
Irene Diamond
Isham Jones
It Had to Be You (song)
It Happened One Night
Jack Benny
Jack L. Warner
Janie (1944 film)
Jean Lenoir (composer)
Jean Renoir
Jean the Tenant
Jews
Jim Thorpe – All-American
Jimmy Van Heusen
Jimmy the Gent (film)
Joan Alison
John Loder (actor)
John Qualen
John Varley (author)
Joseph Breen
Journal of Popular Film & Television
Joy Page
Julien Duvivier
Julius J. Epstein
Jön az öcsém
Júdás
Kid Galahad (1937 film)
King Creole
King Kong (1933 film)
Knock on Wood (1942 song)
Kramer vs. Kramer
La Grande Illusion
La La Land (film)
La Marseillaise
Labyrinth of Horror
Laserdisc
Lauren Bacall
Lawrence Van Gelder
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leitmotif
Leonard Maltin
Leonid Kinskey
Lew Brown
Library of Congress
Life with Father (film)
Liliom (1919 film)
Liner notes
Lisbon
List of films considered the best
Little Big Shot (1935 film)
Lockheed Model 12 Electra Junior
Los Angeles Times
Louis V. Arco
Love for Sale (song)
Lu, the Coquette
Ludwig Stössel
Luise Rainer
Lulu (1918 film)
Lux Radio Theater
Lux Radio Theatre
MGM Home Entertainment
MSN
MacGuffin
Madeleine Lebeau
Madonna (entertainer)
Madonna of Avenue A
Magic Waltz
Magnetic Video
Making of
Mammy (1930 film)
Mandalay (film)
Marcel Dalio
Mark Hellinger Theatre
Marty (film)
Marx Brothers
Master Zoard
Max Steiner
Maxime Weygand
Mayo Methot
Melodrama
Metacritic
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Michael Curtiz
Michael Curtiz filmography
Michael Dirda
Michael Walsh (author)
Michèle Morgan
Midnight Cowboy
Mildred Pierce (film)
Million Dollar Baby
Mission to Moscow
Moonlight (2016 film)
Motion Picture Production Code
Mountain Justice (1937 film)
Mr. Doctor (film)
Mrs. Dane's Confession
Mrs. Miniver
Mrs. Tutti Frutti
Murray Burnett
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Dream Is Yours
My Fair Lady (film)
My Husband's Getting Married
Mystery of the Wax Museum
NBC
Nabil Ayouch
Nameless (1923 film)
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Award for Best Director
National Board of Review Awards 1943
National Film Preservation Board
National Film Registry
National anthem
Naval Battle of Casablanca
Nazi German
Nazi Germany
Nazi Party
Neil Simon
New York City
New York Film Critics
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Director
Newport, Rhode Island
Newspapers.com
Night and Day (1946 film)
No Country for Old Men
Noah's Ark (1928 film)
Nobody's Son (film)
Nomadland
Norma Varden
OCLC (identifier)
Oedipus complex
Oliver! (film)
Olivia de Havilland
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Operation Torch
Ordinary People
Out Cold (2001 film)
Out of Africa (film)
Overdrawn at the Memory Bank
Owen Marks
Parasite (2019 film)
Parlez-moi d'amour (song)
Passage to Marseille
Patton (film)
Paul Henreid
Pauline Kael
Peace's Road
Perfidia
Peter Lorre
Philip G. Epstein
Philip Morris Playhouse
Phonograph record
Platoon (film)
Play It Again, Sam (1972 film)
Portugal in World War II
Prefecture of Police
Principal photography
Prisoner of the Night (film)
Private Detective 62
Production Code Administration
Pépé le Moko
RTÉ
Radio
Rain Man
Ray Noble (musician)
Razzia (2017 film)
Rebecca (1940 film)
Red Ventures
Refugee
Republic of Ireland
Republican faction (Spanish Civil War)
Resistance in the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia
Review aggregator
Rhino Records
Richard Ryen
River's End (1930 film)
Robert McKee
Robert Zemeckis
Rocky
RogerEbert.com
Roger Ebert
Romance on the High Seas
Romantic drama film
Ronald Haver
Ronald Reagan
Rotten Tomatoes
Roughly Speaking (film)
Rudy Behlmer
S. Z. Sakall
S2CID (identifier)
Santa Fe Trail (film)
Saturn Award for Best DVD Classic Film Release
Schindler's List
Second Italo-Ethiopian War
Secret of St. Job Forest
Semiotics
Set dresser
Seven of Spades (film)
Shakespeare in Love
Shine (Cecil Mack song)
Shine On, Harvest Moon (1944 film)
Slumdog Millionaire
Sodom and Gomorrah (1922 film)
Sons of Liberty (film)
Sotheby's
Soundtrack album
Spanish Civil War
Special effect
Spotlight (film)
Spring in Winter
Stephen Hunter
Stereotype
Stolen Holiday
Sydney Greenstreet
TBS (American TV channel)
Tablet (magazine)
Takarazuka Revue
Tangier
Tartar Invasion
Ted Turner
Television
Tenderloin (film)
Terms of Endearment
Terry Gilliam
The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1960 film)
The Adventures of Robin Hood
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Atlantic
The Baltimore Sun
The Best Things in Life Are Free (film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Black Rainbow
The Borrowed Babies
The Boy from Oklahoma
The Breaking Point (1950 film)
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Cabin in the Cotton
The Case of the Curious Bride
The Charge of the Light Brigade (1936 film)
The Charlatan (1917 film)
The Cheap Detective
The Colonel (1918 film)
The Comancheros (film)
The Daily Telegraph
The Deer Hunter
The Departed
The Desert Song (1943 film)
The Desired Woman
The Devil (1918 Hungarian film)
The Egyptian (film)
The English Patient (film)
The Exile (1914 film)
The Fishing Bell
The French Connection (film)
The Gamblers (1929 film)
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Golden Butterfly
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guardian
The Hangman (1959 film)
The Helen Morgan Story
The Hurt Locker
The Jazz Singer (1952 film)
The Karthauzer
The Kennel Murder Case (film)
The Key (1934 film)
The Keyhole (1933 film)
The King's Speech
The Lady Takes a Sailor
The Lady with the Black Gloves
The Last Bohemian (1912 film)
The Last Dawn
The Last Emperor
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Mad Genius
The Maltese Falcon (1941 film)
The Man in the Net
The Matrimonial Bed
The Medic (1916 film)
The Merry Widow (1918 film)
The Moon of Israel
The New York Times
The New York Times Magazine
The New Yorker
The Overlook Press
The Paducah Sun
The Perfect Specimen
The Princess in a Nightrobe
The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex
The Proud Rebel
The Red Samson
The Rules of the Game
The Scarlet Hour
The Scourge of God (film)
The Screen Guild Theater
The Sea Hawk (1940 film)
The Sea Wolf (1941 film)
The Shape of Water
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Sound of Music (film)
The Star of Damascus
The Sting
The Story of Will Rogers
The Strange Love of Molly Louvain
The Strength of the Fatherland
The Sunflower Woman
The Third Degree (1926 film)
The Ugly Boy
The Unsuspected
The Usual Suspects
The Vagabond King (1956 film)
The Very Thought of You
The Walking Dead (1936 film)
The Washington Post
The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)
The Wolf (1916 film)
The Woman from Monte Carlo
This Is the Army
Time (magazine)
Titanic (1997 film)
To Have and Have Not (film)
Today and Tomorrow (1912 film)
Todd Gitlin
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Torben Meyer
Trouble Along the Way
Trude Berliner
Turner Broadcasting System
Turner Classic Movies
Turner Entertainment
Turner Entertainment Co.
Ultra HD Blu-ray
Umberto Eco
Under a Texas Moon
Unforgiven
United Artists
United States House Committee on the Judiciary
United States Office of War Information
VHS
Van Nuys, Los Angeles
Van Nuys Airport
Variety (magazine)
Venus de Milo
Vichy France
Vienna
Vincent Rose
Virginia City (film)
Warner Bros.
Warner Bros. Pictures
Warner Bros. Presents
Warner Home Video
Washington, D.C.
Wayback Machine
We're No Angels (1955 film)
West Side Story (1961 film)
Wheel series
White Christmas (film)
White House
Why We Fight
William Wyler
Wings (1927 film)
Winston Churchill
Wolfgang Zilzer
Woody Allen
World War II
Writers Guild of America, West
Yankee Doodle Dandy
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Young Man with a Horn (film)
Young Medardus
http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/c2.html
http://www.dvdbeaver.com/film2/DVDReviews27/casablanca.htm
https://books.google.com/books?id=DRd1DZ-5MX0C&pg=PA35
https://books.google.com/books?id=gb2MJdqN2owC&pg=PA79
https://books.google.com/books?id=3bzpxp_FHj8C&pg=PA32
https://web.archive.org/web/20021028174808/http://www.liveworld.com/transcripts/borders/1-08-1999.1-1.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20071012203236/http://cbsnews.com/stories/2006/05/31/ap/entertainment/mainD8HUTL900.shtml
https://web.archive.org/web/20071124225249/http://www.hachettebookgroupusa.com/authorslounge/articles/1999/april/article7805.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20060813151310/http://www.wga.org/subpage_newsevents.aspx?id=1807
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/11/star-wars-movie-misquotes-poll
https://www.nytimes.com/1998/09/12/movies/leonid-kinskey-95-bartender-in-casablanca.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/17/magazine/17FOB-onlanguage-t.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20090308125514/http://www.themodernword.com/eco/eco_casablanca.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080917201832/http://www.dvdbeaver.com/film2/DVDReviews27/casablanca.htm
https://archive.org/download/ScreenGuildTheater/Sgt_43-04-26_ep141_Casablanca.mp3
https://archive.org/download/Lux09/Lux_44-01-24_Casablanca.mp3
https://archive.org/download/Romance_339/Romance44-12-19083Casablanca.mp3
https://web.archive.org/web/20070811082912/http://www.ingridbergman.com/about/bio2.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20170326225520/http://www.nytimes.com/1998/09/12/movies/leonid-kinskey-95-bartender-in-casablanca.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20160515080030/http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-36295621
https://web.archive.org/web/20140708231215/http://www.rogerebert.com/answer-man/was-the-pres-crushed-and-drowned-before-or-after-the-arks
https://web.archive.org/web/20140709010134/http://www.rogerebert.com/answer-man/what-color-were-zuzus-petals-in-its-a-wonderful-life-easy
https://web.archive.org/web/20121215022650/http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-20734605
https://web.archive.org/web/20140911132032/http://www.bonhams.com/auctions/22196/
https://web.archive.org/web/20111024210616/http://www.variety.com/review/VE1117487980/
https://web.archive.org/web/20051221002133/http://imdb.com/title/tt0280526/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150922053835/http://newsok.com/casablanca-to-be-shown-on-the-big-screen-in-oklahoma-city/article/3655669
https://web.archive.org/web/20160502203716/https://books.google.com/books?id=DRd1DZ-5MX0C&pg=PA35
https://web.archive.org/web/20121110134922/http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/05/AR2007010500168.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110707172751/http://www.arttimesjournal.com/film/archetypes.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20110604054834/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,923243-2,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20160429181456/https://books.google.com/books?id=3bzpxp_FHj8C&pg=PA32
https://web.archive.org/web/20090629120246/http://www.criterion.com/current/posts/791
https://web.archive.org/web/20160303222420/http://www.nytimes.com/1989/09/20/movies/25-films-chosen-for-the-national-registry.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20101211235524/http://www.hometheaterforum.com/forum/thread/275515/whv-press-release-casablanca-ultimate-collector-s-edition-dvd-blu-ray
https://web.archive.org/web/20120422232103/http://www.blu-ray.com/news/?id=8054
https://web.archive.org/web/20120111124633/http://articles.baltimoresun.com/1990-12-14/entertainment/1990348013_1_robert-redford-havana-redford-plays
https://web.archive.org/web/20141012110332/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/9713736/Casablanca-playing-it-again-as-film-sequel-planned.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20141012023150/http://insidemovies.ew.com/2012/11/05/casablanca-sequel/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090925065851/http://kageki.hankyu.co.jp/casablanca/
https://web.archive.org/web/20071106004115/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,963207,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151217184411/http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/17/magazine/17FOB-onlanguage-t.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20161115201651/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/11/star-wars-movie-misquotes-poll
https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2016/12/la-la-land-review-damien-chazelle-ryan-gosling-emma-stone/510092/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/05/AR2007010500168.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1989/09/20/movies/25-films-chosen-for-the-national-registry.html
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00009W0WM
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B000I0RR7Q
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v8482
http://www.afm47.org/press/three-pianists-of-casablanca/
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9C06E1DF1039E33BBC4F51DFB7678389659EDE
https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn89060136/1943-02-19/ed-1/seq-7/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0034583/
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/films/2016/05/16/casablanca-michael-curtizs-1942-film-is-a-classic-love-story---w/
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/9713736/Casablanca-playing-it-again-as-film-sequel-planned.html
https://viaf.org/viaf/178212982
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4133776-1
https://www.idref.fr/077762649
https://web.archive.org/web/20150811060754/http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-casablanca-1942
https://web.archive.org/web/20130921125536/http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/casablanca-4
http://www.vincasa.com/indexkoch.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080430060149/http://www.vincasa.com/indexkoch.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130927143235/http://www.ellecanada.com/relationships/the-demise-of-dating/a/45097/2
https://web.archive.org/web/20131003040149/http://www.empireonline.com/features/how-hollywood-won-world-war-two/
http://entertainment.ca.msn.com/movies/galleries/guess-the-movie-quote-how-well-do-you-know-classic-romantic-films?page=5
https://web.archive.org/web/20130412001911/http://entertainment.ca.msn.com/movies/galleries/guess-the-movie-quote-how-well-do-you-know-classic-romantic-films?page=5
https://web.archive.org/web/20130112193310/http://www.starpulse.com/news/Dee_Doyle/2008/06/05/best_movie_lines_that_have_stuck_in_pop_
http://www.starpulse.com/news/Dee_Doyle/2008/06/05/best_movie_lines_that_have_stuck_in_pop_
https://web.archive.org/web/20121103072836/http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-505183_162-57501896-10391735/round-up-the-usual-suspects/
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2FBF02691992?LI=true
http://people.virginia.edu/~hms2f/round-up.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151212091856/http://people.virginia.edu/~hms2f/round-up.html
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-36295621
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-20734605
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0280526/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100811185345/http://www.time.com/time/columnist/corliss/article/0,9565,1068026,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110628043426/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/quotes400.pdf
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=casablanca.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1003707-casablanca
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14661188r
https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/25/nyregion/casablanca-piano-to-be-auctioned-at-bonhams.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20141129223335/http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/25/nyregion/casablanca-piano-to-be-auctioned-at-bonhams.html
https://www.amazon.com/Casablanca-Anniversary-Limited-Collectors-Edition/dp/B006BG7RI0/
https://www.tvweek.com/open-mic/2012/11/the-most-outrageous-experiment-even-conducted-in-the-movie-industry-do-those-working-in-the-movies-k/
https://www.filmcomment.com/issue/november-december-1982/
https://www.nytimes.com/1982/12/05/opinion/topics-weather-eyes-play-it-again.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20160516134800/https://books.google.com/books?id=gb2MJdqN2owC&pg=PA79
https://www.tcd.ie/irishfilm/censor/show.php?fid=3554
https://www.independent.ie/irish-news/the-mystery-of-the-casablanca-dialogue-cut-by-the-film-censor-26226579.html
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14661188r
https://archive.org/details/censorshippapers00gard
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F01439689508604551
https://archive.org/details/casablancamancin0000robe
https://archive.org/details/casablancamancin0000robe/page/79
https://archive.org/details/roundupusualsusp00harm
https://archive.org/details/cityboyscagneybo0000skla/page/135
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q132689#P345
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q132689#P1562
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q132689#P2631
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q132689#P3593
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q132689#P1258
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q132689#P1237
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/27175
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/casablanca
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-casablanca-1942
https://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/casablanca-4
https://www.empireonline.com/features/how-hollywood-won-world-war-two/
https://www.indiewire.com/2012/11/5-things-you-might-not-know-about-casablanca-on-its-70th-anniversary-103675/
https://www.rogerebert.com/answer-man/was-the-pres-crushed-and-drowned-before-or-after-the-arks
https://www.rogerebert.com/answer-man/what-color-were-zuzus-petals-in-its-a-wonderful-life-easy
https://www.variety.com/review/VE1117487980/
https://ew.com/article/2016/11/21/allied-robert-zemeckis-concept-art-casablanca/
https://www.criterion.com/current/posts/791
https://www.empireonline.com/500/51.asp
https://archive.org/details/casablancaastime0000mill
https://news.sky.com/story/casablanca-as-time-goes-by-piano-up-for-sale-10462626
https://www.marieclaire.co.uk/news/celebrity-news/madonna-in-casablanca-remake-192017
https://www.cbsnews.com/8301-505183_162-57501896-10391735/round-up-the-usual-suspects/
https://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2006/05/31/ap/entertainment/mainD8HUTL900.shtml
https://www.loc.gov/static/programs/national-film-preservation-board/documents/casablanca1.pdf
https://www.npr.org/2017/12/17/565777766/whats-casablanca-without-nazis-after-wwii-german-audiences-found-out
https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://books.google.com/books/about/America_s_Film_Legacy.html?id=deq3xI8OmCkC
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=950&dat=19430204&id=PwlQAAAAIBAJ&pg=5175,4021701
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:159900256
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:191655019
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q132689#identifiers
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/02/africa-cinema-history
https://web.archive.org/web/20170221012313/https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/02/africa-cinema-history
https://web.archive.org/web/20121218091756/http://judiciary.house.gov/legacy/4183.htm
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:191601721
https://web.archive.org/web/20131224104448/http://www.americanheritage.com/content/casablanca
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/1097005.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20121024200400/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/1097005.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20111003143835/http://www2.lib.virginia.edu/exhibits/censored/film.html
https://archive.org/details/ingridingridberg00chan/page/19
https://archive.org/details/ingridingridberg00chan/page/88/mode/2up
https://variety.com/2017/film/festivals/toronto-director-ayouch-response-to-intolerance-with-razzia-1202559864/
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/release/rl2957542913/
https://www.ellecanada.com/relationships/the-demise-of-dating/a/45097/2
https://www.ingridbergman.com/about/bio2.htm
https://cinemavox.ma/cinemavox/
https://judiciary.house.gov/legacy/4183.htm
https://www.americanheritage.com/casablanca
https://www.library.virginia.edu/exhibitions/
https://www.bonhams.com/auctions/22196/
https://oklahoman.com/article/3655669/casablanca-to-be-shown-on-the-big-screen-in-oklahoma-city
https://www.metacritic.com/browse/movies/score/metascore/all/filtered?sort=desc
https://www.rogerebert.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19960503/REVIEWS/605030301
https://time.com/time/columnist/corliss/article/0,9565,1068026,00.html
https://www.wga.org/subpage_newsevents.aspx?id=1807
https://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/quotes400.pdf
https://www.arttimesjournal.com/film/archetypes.htm
https://time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,923243-2,00.html
http://shipwrecklibrary.com/eco/eco_casablanca.html
https://www.hometheaterforum.com/community/threads/whv-press-release-casablanca-ultimate-collectors-edition-dvd-blu-ray.271721/
https://www.blu-ray.com/news/?id=8054
https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/bs-xpm-1990-12-14-1990348013-story.html
https://ew.com/article/2012/11/05/casablanca-sequel/
https://www.liveworld.com/transcripts/borders/1-08-1999.1-1.html
https://www.hachettebookgroup.com/authorslounge/articles/1999/april/article7805.html
https://www.noexit.co.uk/suspects
https://kageki.hankyu.co.jp/casablanca/
https://time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,963207,00.html
https://www.wga.org/writers-room/101-best-lists/101-greatest-screenplays/list
https://brightlightsfilm.com/casablanca-romance-propaganda/#identifier_12_14962
http://www.tabletmag.com/scroll/141861/the-brothers-who-co-wrote-casablanca
https://web.archive.org/web/20150616044027/http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/barb-wire-1996
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/10/theater/review-casablancabox-is-looking-at-you-kid-behind-the-scenes.html
https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220110/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/films/2016/05/16/casablanca-michael-curtizs-1942-film-is-a-classic-love-story---w/
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007586304705171
https://www.rogerebert.com/roger-ebert/as-time-goes-by-its-the-still-the-same-old-glorious-casablanca
https://www.newspapers.com/image/427330404/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q132689#P444
https://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/01/movies/critic-s-choice-film-before-casablanca-there-was-pepe.html
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/610/enwp
https://archive.today/2009.10.26-041810/http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/c2.html
https://musicbrainz.org/work/6998405c-2182-40dd-97ed-25e0c557ce70
https://web.archive.org/web/20150328213706/https://www.tvweek.com/open-mic/2012/11/the-most-outrageous-experiment-even-conducted-in-the-movie-industry-do-those-working-in-the-movies-k/
https://www.northjersey.com/story/entertainment/2017/11/08/casablanca-as-time-goes-by-written-in-flicton/836962001/
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F01956050009602809
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0362-4331
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F01956051.1990.9943650
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F17400309.2014.982900
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F01956050009602812
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/31873886
https://aframe.oscars.org/news/post/casablanca-4k-restoration-interview
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058515807406706
https://archive.org/stream/CasablancaAndAmericanHeadway3/Casablanca_djvu.txt
https://archive.org/stream/variety153-1944-01#page/n51/mode/2up
https://web.archive.org/web/20170317201241/http://www.archive.org/stream/variety153-1944-01
https://www.rogerebert.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19960915/REVIEWS08/401010308/1023
https://web.archive.org/web/20100228081634/http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19960915/REVIEWS08/401010308/1023
https://web.archive.org/web/20190809210855/https://www.metacritic.com/browse/movies/score/metascore/all/filtered?sort=desc
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2022/nov/26/casablanca-80-humphrey-bogart-ingrid-bergman
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0261-3077
