David Copperfield (1935 film)
David Copperfield is a 1935 American film released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer based upon Charles Dickens' 1850 novel The Personal History, Adventures, Experience, & Observation of David Copperfield the Younger (though a number of characters and incidents from the novel were omitted).
The story was adapted by Hugh Walpole from the Dickens novel, and the film was directed by George Cukor from a screenplay by Howard Estabrook and Lenore J. Coffee, who was not credited.
The novel was adapted for three silent film versions prior to this, the first sound production.


== Plot ==
David's father dies before his birth and therefore the young man is forced to spend his childhood without the presence of a father figure. He finds valid support in his mother and housekeeper Peggotty. David's mother, however, feels the need to have a husband and therefore marries Mr. Murdstone, a severe and insensitive man, and welcomes his sister into the house; she proves to be even more insensitive than her brother.
When David's mother dies, Murdstone sends David to London to work in his family's wine bottling plant. During this time he is assisted by the Micawber family and forms a close friendship with its members. Mr. Micawber, with his courtly language and with his head a little in the air, is unable to look after the expenses of the house and gets into debt; at this point David decides to run away from London. After a thousand adventures, he reaches Dover on foot, where his great-aunt, Betsie Trotwood, lives. His aunt welcomes him together with her roommate Mr. Dick and they send him to boarding school in Canterbury, where he rents a room with the lawyer Wickfield and forms a sincere friendship with Wickfield's daughter, Agnes.
David meets Dora Spenlow at the ballet and falls in love, eventually marrying her. Dora is young and flighty and inept at running a household, and dies not long after their marriage. David and Micawber then help to unmask Uriah Heep as the forger and cheat that he is and return Wickfield's firm to its rightful owner. David and Agnes end the film finally expressing their love for each other.


== Cast ==
(in order of appearance)

Cast notes:

Arthur Treacher has a cameo as the man with the donkey who steals young David's money, forcing him to walk from London to Dover.


== Production ==
David O. Selznick dearly wanted to film David Copperfield, as his Russian father, Lewis J. Selznick, had learned English through it, and read it to his sons every night.  After failing to dissuade Selznick from the project, Louis B. Mayer, his father-in-law and employer, agreed that MGM would underwrite the production provided his star child contract actor Jackie Cooper was cast in the role of the young David. Selznick fought to remain true to the novel's origins and prevailed, and the role went to Freddie Bartholomew after an extensive talent search in Canada and Great Britain by Selznick and George Cukor.
Cedric Gibbons designed a recreation of 19th century London on the MGM backlot. The scenes set outside Aunt Betsey's house atop the white cliffs of Dover were filmed at Malibu. MGM even filmed the exterior of Canterbury Cathedral, which only appears in the film for less than a minute. Special effects, including many matte shots, were by Slavko Vorkapić.Charles Laughton was originally cast in the role of Mr. Micawber, and was authentically made up with a bald cap, since Dickens describes the character as hairless. After two days' work, he disliked his performance in the dailies and asked to be replaced. It was said at the time that "he looked as though he were about to molest the child."
Selznick released Laughton, who, in turn, recommended comedian and Dickens scholar W. C. Fields for the part. A clause in Fields' contract stated that he had to play the part with a British accent, but as he had difficulty learning the lines and had to read off cue cards he thus speaks in his own accent in the role. His defense: "My father was an Englishman and I inherited this accent from him! Are you trying to go against nature?!" This is the only film where Fields does not ad lib, and he plays the character in a straightforward manner (although he did want to add a juggling sequence; when this was denied, an anecdote about snakes, which was also denied). Director George Cukor said that when Fields did make a suggestion for a visual bit, such as accidentally dipping his quill in a teacup instead of an inkwell, it was always within the parameters of the character. The result was one of the finest performances of that year.


== Reception ==
The film was well-received upon its release in January 1935. Andre Sennwald of The New York Times called it "the most profoundly satisfying screen manipulation of a great novel the camera has ever given us." Variety wrote that it had "one of the most evenly good casts ever to have been assembled", with staging and costumes that were "almost always excellent." John Mosher of The New Yorker found the first half of the film "one of the superb things of the movies" and the second half more conventional, though "all of it is good." Mosher also praised the casting and opined that Freddie Bartholemew put on "one of the prettiest performances ever given on the screen by a youngster." David Copperfield topped the Film Daily year-end poll of 451 critics around the country as the best film of 1935.David Copperfield was nominated for three Academy Awards, including Academy Award for Best Picture, Best Film Editing (Robert J. Kern), and Best Assistant Director (Joseph M. Newman), and was nominated for the Mussolini Cup for Best Foreign Film at the Venice Film Festival (losing out to Anna Karenina).
It was the 20th most popular film at the British box office in 1935-1936 after Modern Times, Lives of a Bengal Lancer, Mutiny on the Bounty, Top Hat, The Great Ziegfeld, The Scarlet Pimpernel, Mr Deeds Goes to Town, Show Boat, The Iron Duke, Love Me Forever, Sanders of the River, Dark Angel, The Ghost Goes West, Follow the Fleet, Swing Time, Things to Come, The 39 Steps, Clive of India, and Escape Me Never.There were several notable differences in the film from the book. For instance, in the film David never attends Salem House boarding school, and so the characters he met there do not appear, with the exception of Steerforth, who instead made his appearance as head boy of David's school he attended after going to live with Betsey Trotwood.
It is shown in many countries on television at Christmas. It is rated with four out of four stars every year in Halliwell's Film Guide.
This was selected by The New York Times as one of the 1000 greatest movies ever made.
The film is referred to in the Dad's Army episode "The Deadly Attachment".


=== Box office ===
According to MGM records the film earned $2,969,000 at the box office worldwide and made a profit of $686,000.  It earned an additional $95,000 from a reissue in 1937-1938.


== See also ==
Lionel Barrymore filmography


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Tibbetts, John C., and James M. Welsh, eds. The Encyclopedia of Novels Into Film (2nd ed. 2005) pp 89–91.


== External links ==

David Copperfield at the American Film Institute Catalog
David Copperfield at IMDb
David Copperfield at the TCM Movie Database
David Copperfield at AllMovie
David Copperfield at Rotten Tomatoes
Charles Dicken's David Copperfield script, MSS 4068 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Brigham Young UniversityAFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Bill of Divorcement (1932 film)
A Double Life (1947 film)
A Farewell to Arms (1957 film)
A Life of Her Own
A Star Is Born (1937 film)
A Star Is Born (1954 film)
A Tale of Two Cities (1935 film)
A Woman's Face
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Awards
Ad lib
Adam's Rib
Agnes Wickfield
AllMovie
Anna Karenina (1935 film)
Arthur Treacher
Backlot
Basil Rathbone
Best Assistant Director
Betrayal (1929 film)
Betsey Trotwood
Bhowani Junction (film)
Born Yesterday (1950 film)
Brigham Young University
Camille (1936 film)
Canterbury Cathedral
Cedric Gibbons
Charles Dickens
Charles Higham (biographer)
Charles Laughton
Chinatown Nights (1929 film)
Christopher Strong
Clive of India (film)
Copperfield (musical)
Cue cards
Dad's Army
Dailies
Dancing Lady
David Copperfield
David Copperfield (1911 film)
David Copperfield (1913 film)
David Copperfield (1922 film)
David Copperfield (1956 TV serial)
David Copperfield (1966 TV serial)
David Copperfield (1969 film)
David Copperfield (1974 TV serial)
David Copperfield (1986 TV serial)
David Copperfield (1993 film)
David Copperfield (1999 film)
David Copperfield (2000 film)
David Copperfield (character)
David O. Selznick
David O. Selznick filmography
Dinner at Eight (1933 film)
Dora Spenlow
Duel in the Sun (film)
Edna May Oliver
Edward, My Son
Edward Murdstone
Elizabeth Allan
Elsa Lanchester
Escape Me Never (1935 film)
Film Daily
Florine McKinney
Follow the Fleet
Forgotten Faces (1928 film)
Frank Lawton
Freddie Bartholomew
Gaslight (1944 film)
George Cukor
Girls About Town (film)
Gone to Earth (film)
Gone with the Wind (film)
Grumpy (1930 film)
Harry Beresford
Heller in Pink Tights
Her Cardboard Lover
Herbert Mundin
Herbert Stothart
Holiday (1938 film)
Howard Estabrook
Hugh Walpole
Hugh Williams
I'll Be Seeing You (1944 film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
Intermezzo (1939 film)
It Should Happen to You
Ivan F. Simpson
Jackie Cooper
James Steerforth
Jean Cadell
Jessie Ralph
John Buckler (actor)
John Mosher (writer)
Joseph M. Newman
Justine (1969 film)
Keeper of the Flame (film)
Lennox Pawle
Lenore J. Coffee
Les Girls
Leslie Halliwell
Let's Make Love
Lewis J. Selznick
Lewis Stone
Light's Diamond Jubilee
Lionel Barrymore
Lionel Barrymore filmography
Little Lord Fauntleroy (1936 film)
Little Women (1933 film)
Loews Cineplex Entertainment
Louis B. Mayer
Love Among the Ruins (film)
Love Me Forever (film)
Mabel Colcord
Made for Each Other (1939 film)
Madge Evans
Malibu, California
Manhattan Melodrama
Marilyn Knowlden
Matte (filmmaking)
Maureen O'Sullivan
Meet the Baron
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Micawber (TV series)
Modern Times (film)
Mr. Dick
Mr Deeds Goes to Town
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
Night Flight (1933 film)
Nothing Sacred (film)
Oliver T. Marsh
Our Betters
Pat and Mike
Peggotty
Portrait of Jennie
Rebecca (1940 film)
Reckless (1935 film)
Renee Gadd
Reward Unlimited
Rich and Famous (1981 film)
Robert J. Kern
Rockabye (1932 film)
Roland Young
Romeo and Juliet (1936 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Roulette (1924 film)
Sanders of the River
Show Boat (1936 film)
Since You Went Away
Slavko Vorkapić
Something's Got to Give
Special effects
Spellbound (1945 film)
Street of Chance (1930 film)
Susan and God
Swing Time (film)
Sylvia Scarlett
Tarnished Lady
Terminal Station (film)
The 39 Steps (1935 film)
The Actress
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1938 film)
The Animal Kingdom (1932 film)
The Blue Bird (1976 film)
The Chapman Report
The Corn Is Green (1979 film)
The Dark Angel (1935 film)
The Deadly Attachment
The Four Feathers (1929 film)
The Garden of Allah (1936 film)
The Ghost Goes West
The Great Ziegfeld
The Iron Duke (film)
The Lives of a Bengal Lancer (film)
The Man I Love (1929 film)
The Marrying Kind
The Model and the Marriage Broker
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Paradine Case
The Personal History of David Copperfield
The Philadelphia Story (film)
The Prisoner of Zenda (1937 film)
The Royal Family of Broadway
The Scarlet Pimpernel (1934 film)
The Third Man
The Virtuous Sin
The Women (1939 film)
The Young in Heart
Things to Come
Top Hat
Topaze (1933 American film)
Travels with My Aunt (film)
Turner Classic Movies
Two-Faced Woman
Una O'Connor (actress)
Uriah Heep (character)
Vanessa: Her Love Story
Variety (magazine)
Venice Film Festival
Violet Kemble-Cooper
Viva Villa!
W. C. Fields
What Price Hollywood?
White cliffs of Dover
Wild Is the Wind
Wilkins Micawber
William Axt
Winged Victory (film)
Zaza (1939 film)
https://archive.org/stream/filmdailyvolume669newy#page/66/mode/2up
https://sites.lib.byu.edu/sc/
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9403E0D9103FE53ABC4152DFB766838E629EDE
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v12542
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0026266/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/6939
https://www.imdb.com/name/nm0871546/
https://archive.org/details/filmsofwcfields00desc
https://archive.org/details/filmsofwcfields00desc/page/106
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/david_copperfield_1935
https://books.google.com/books?id=4bnQBQAAQBAJ&q=Lenore%20J.%20Coffee%20David%20Copperfield&pg=PA248
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/72384/enwp
http://archives.lib.byu.edu/repositories/14/resources/11320
