District 9
District 9 is a 2009 science fiction action film directed by Neill Blomkamp in his feature film debut, written by Blomkamp and Terri Tatchell, and produced by Peter Jackson and Carolynne Cunningham. It is a co-production of New Zealand, the United States, and South Africa. The film stars Sharlto Copley, Jason Cope, and David James, and was adapted from Blomkamp's 2006 short film Alive in Joburg.
The film is partially presented in a found footage format by featuring fictional interviews, news footage, and video from surveillance cameras. The story, which explores themes of humanity, xenophobia and social segregation, begins in an alternate 1982, when an alien spaceship appears over Johannesburg, South Africa. When a population of sick and malnourished insectoid aliens is discovered on the ship, the South African government confines them to an internment camp called District 9. Twenty years later, during the government's relocation of the aliens to another camp, one of the confined aliens named Christopher Johnson, who is about to try to escape from Earth with his son and return home, crosses paths with a bureaucrat named Wikus van de Merwe leading the relocation. The title and premise of District 9 were inspired by events in Cape Town's District Six, during the apartheid era.
A viral marketing campaign for the film began in 2008 at San Diego Comic-Con, while the theatrical trailer debuted in July 2009. District 9 had its World Premiere on 23 July 23 2009 at San Diego Comic-Con. It was released by TriStar Pictures on 14 August 2009, in North America and became a financial success, earning over $210 million at the box office. It also received acclaim from critics and garnered numerous awards and nominations, including four Academy Award nominations for Best Picture, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Visual Effects, and Best Film Editing.


== Plot ==
In 1982, a giant extraterrestrial spaceship arrives and hovers over the South African city of Johannesburg. An investigation team finds over a million malnourished aliens inside, and the South African government relocates them to a camp called District 9. However, over the years, it turns into a slum, and locals often complain that the aliens—derogatorily called "prawns"—are filthy, ignorant lawbreakers who bleed resources from humans.
Following unrest between the aliens and locals, the government hires Multinational United (MNU), a giant weapons manufacturer, to relocate the aliens to a new camp outside the city. Piet Smit, an MNU executive, appoints MNU employee and his son-in-law, Wikus van de Merwe, to lead the relocation. Meanwhile, three aliens, Christopher Johnson, his young son CJ, and his friend Paul, search a District 9 garbage dump for alien fuel in Prawn technology, which Christopher has had them spend the last twenty years synthesizing enough of to enact his plan. They finally finish in Paul's shack as the relocation begins, but when Wikus comes to the shack to serve Paul a notice, he finds the hidden container with the fuel and accidentally sprays some of it in his face while confiscating it. Koobus Venter, a cruel MNU mercenary, kills Paul.
Wikus begins mutating into a Prawn, starting with his left arm injured after the fuel exposure. He is immediately taken to the brutal MNU lab, where researchers discover his chimeric DNA grants him the ability to operate Prawn weaponry, which is biologically restricted for them. Wanting to capture this human/alien hybridity before Wikus fully transforms, Smit orders Wikus' body to be vivisected and harvested for its profitable properties. Wikus, however, overpowers the lab personnel and escapes. While Venter's forces hunt for him, a smear story is broadcast, one that reaches Wikus' wife and Smit's daughter, Tania, claiming Wikus is a wanted fugitive who has contracted a contagious disease from copulating with aliens.
Wikus takes refuge in District 9, finding Christopher and the spaceship's concealed command module dropship underneath his house. Christopher explains to Wikus the confiscated fuel is crucial to his plan of reactivating the dropship, and if he can get them in the dropship to the mothership, he can cure Wikus. Wikus attempts to acquire weapons from the District 9 Nigerian arms dealer Obesandjo, who wants to eat Wikus's alien arm to gain alien abilities. Wikus, however, seizes an alien weapon and escapes.
Wikus and Christopher force their way through MNU to the lab and retrieve the fuel. However, after seeing the barbarous experiments MNU has performed on his people in the lab—including a dissected Paul—Christopher tells Wikus he must return home as fast as possible for help and cannot undo Wikus’ mutation until he returns in three years due to the limited supply of the fuel. Enraged, Wikus knocks Christopher down and attempts to fly the module to the mothership himself, but Venter's forces shoot it down. Venter captures Wikus and Christopher, but Obesandjo's gang ambushes the MNU convoy and seizes Wikus.
Meanwhile, CJ, remaining hidden in the dropship, remotely activates the mothership and a large, alien, mechanized battle suit in Obesandjo's base. The suit guns down the Nigerians, and Wikus enters the suit and rescues Christopher from the mercenaries. Heading to the dropship, the two come under heavy fire, and Wikus stays behind to fend off the mercenaries, buying time for Christopher, who promises to return after three years and heal Wikus, to leave. After all of the other mercenaries are killed, Venter finally cripples the suit and is about to execute Wikus when slum Prawns attack and dismember him alive. Christopher makes it into the dropship with CJ, and the dropship is levitated via a tractor beam back into the mothership, which leaves Earth.
MNU's experiments are exposed, and the aliens are moved to the new camp named District 10. Tania finds a metal flower on her doorstep, giving her hope that Wikus is still alive. Wikus, now completely alien, is shown in a junkyard crafting the flower for his wife.


== Cast ==
Sharlto Copley as Wikus van de Merwe, a mild-mannered, shy, bumbling, awkward bureaucrat at the MNU Department of Alien Affairs, who becomes infected with an alien fluid, slowly turning him into one of the "prawns". This was the first time acting professionally in a feature film for Copley, a friend of director Blomkamp.
Jason Cope as Christopher Johnson, a District 9 prawn who assists Wikus in fighting MNU.
Cope also performed the role of Grey Bradnam, the UKNR Chief Correspondent and all the speaking aliens, as well as for the cameraman Trent
David James as Colonel Koobus Venter, an aggressive, sadistic, and xenophobic PMC mercenary-soldier sent to capture Wikus. He is shown as taking pleasure in killing the aliens and responding brutally to anyone who opposes him
Vanessa Haywood as Tania Smit-van de Merwe, Wikus's wife
Mandla Gaduka as Fundiswa Mhlanga, Wikus's assistant and trainee during the eviction
Eugene Wanangwa Khumbanyiwa as Obesandjo, a paralyzed psychopathic Nigerian gang leader who believes that eating alien body parts will enable him to operate their weapons
Louis Minnaar as Piet Smit, managing director of MNU South Africa and Wikus's father-in-law
Kenneth Nkosi as Thomas, an MNU security guard and good friend of Wikus
William Allen Young as Dirk Michaels, the CEO of MNU
Nathalie Boltt as Sarah Livingstone, a sociologist at Kempton Park University
Sylvaine Strike as Katrina McKenzie, a doctor from the Department of Social Assistance
John Sumner as Les Feldman, a MIL engineer
Nick Blake as Francois Moraneu, a member of the CIV Engineer Team
Jed Brophy as James Hope, an officer with the SAPS Alien Crimes Unit
Vittorio Leonardi as Michael Bloemstein, MNU Department of Alien Civil Affairs
Johan van Schoor as Nicolaas van de Merwe, Wikus's father
Marian Hooman as Sandra van de Merwe, Wikus's mother
Jonathan Taylor as the Doctor
Stella Steenkamp as Phyllis Sinderson, MNU Alien Relations
Tim Gordon as Clive Henderson, an entomologist at WLG University
Nick Boraine as Lieutenant Weldon, Colonel Venter's right-hand man
Robert Hobbs as Ross Pienaar, an MNU mercenary
Trevor Coppola as MNU Mercenary
Morne Erasmus as MNU Medic


== Themes ==
Like Alive in Joburg, the short film on which the feature film is based, the setting of District 9 is inspired by historical events during the apartheid era, particularly alluding to District Six, an inner-city residential area in Cape Town, declared a "whites only" area by the government in 1966, with 60,000 people forcibly removed to Cape Flats, 25 km (16 miles) away. The film also refers to contemporary evictions and forced removals to suburban ghettos in post-apartheid South Africa, as well as the resistance of its residents. This includes the high-profile attempted forced removal of the Joe Slovo informal settlement in Cape Town to temporary relocation areas in Delft, plus evictions in the shack settlement Chiawelo, where the film was actually shot. Blikkiesdorp, a temporary relocation area in Cape Town, has also been compared with the District 9 camp, earning a front-page spread in the Daily Voice.Doctor Shohini Chauduri wrote that District 9 even echoes apartheid in its title, as it is reminiscent "of District 6 in Cape Town, declared a whites-only area under the Group Areas Act". She also discusses how the wide shots used in District 9 strongly emphasize the idea of exclusion under apartheid. The separation of people and "prawns" into human and non-human zones marks South Africa's social divisions.The film emphasizes the irony of Wikus and the impact of his experiences on his personality, which shows him becoming more humane as he becomes less biologically human. The film uses his story to pose the question of humanity as the "prawn" characters in the film are shown to be kinder to Wikus than the actual humans are as he undergoes his transformation. The film also features the portrayal of Nigerian Arms dealers, provoking thought on conflict between marginalized communities.  Chris Mikesell from the University of Hawaii newspaper Ka Leo writes that "Substitute 'black,' 'Asian,' 'Mexican,' 'illegal,' 'Jew,’ 'white,’ or any number of different labels for the word 'prawn' in this film and you will hear the hidden truth behind the dialogue".Themes of racism and xenophobia are shown in the form of speciesism. Used to describe the aliens, the word "prawn" is a reference to the Parktown prawn, a king cricket species considered a pest in South Africa. Copley has said that the theme is not intended to be the main focus of the work, but can work at a subconscious level even if it is not noticed. The racism in the film is portrayed on an institutional level, as despite the brutality towards the aliens by MNU exposed to the public they are still relocated as originally planned. Duane Dudek of the Journal Sentinel wrote that "The result is an action film about xenophobia, in which all races of humans are united in their dislike and mistrust of an insect-like species".Another underlying theme in District 9 is states' reliance on multinational corporations (whose accountability is unclear and whose interests are not necessarily congruent with democratic principles) as a form of government-funded enforcement. As MNU represents the type of corporation which partners with governments, the negative portrayal of MNU in the film depicts the dangers of outsourcing militaries and bureaucracies to private contractors.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Producer Peter Jackson planned to produce a film adaptation based on the Halo video game franchise with first-time director Neill Blomkamp. Due to a lack of financing, the Halo adaptation was placed on hold. Jackson and Blomkamp discussed pursuing alternative projects and eventually chose to produce and direct, respectively, District 9 featuring props and items originally made for the Halo film. Blomkamp had previously directed commercials and short films, but District 9 was his first feature film. The director co-wrote the script with his wife, Terri Tatchell, and chose to film in South Africa, where he was born.In District 9, Tatchell and Blomkamp returned to the world explored in his short film Alive in Joburg, choosing characters, moments and concepts that they found interesting including the documentary-style filmmaking, staged interviews, alien designs, alien technology/mecha suits, and the parallels to racial conflict and segregation in South Africa, and fleshing out these elements for the feature film.QED International financed the negative cost. After the 2007 American Film Market, QED partnered with Sony's TriStar Pictures for distribution in several territories.


=== Filming ===
The film was shot on location in Chiawelo, Soweto, during a time of violent unrest in Alexandra (Gauteng) and other South African townships involving clashes between native South Africans and Africans born in other countries. The location that portrays District 9 is itself a real impoverished neighbourhood from which people were being forcibly relocated to government-subsidised housing. Several scenes were shot at the Ponte building.Filming for District 9 took place during the winter in Johannesburg. According to director Neill Blomkamp, during the winter season, Johannesburg "actually looks like Chernobyl", a "nuclear apocalyptic wasteland". Blomkamp wanted to capture the deserted, bleak atmosphere and environment, so he and the crew had to film during the months of June through July. The film took a total of 60 days of shooting. Filming in December raised another issue in that there was much more rain. Due to the rain, there was a lot of greenery to work with, which Blomkamp did not want. Blomkamp had to cut some of the vegetation in the scenery to portray the setting as desolate and dark.
The film features many weapons and vehicles produced by the South African arms industry, including the R5 and Vektor CR-21 assault rifles, Denel NTW-20 20 mm anti-materiel rifle, Milkor BXP submachine gun, Casspir armoured personnel carrier, Ratel infantry fighting vehicle, Rooikat armoured fighting vehicle, Atlas Oryx helicopter and militarized Toyota Hilux "technical" pickup truck.Blomkamp said no single film influenced District 9, but cited the 1980s "hardcore sci-fi/action" films such as Alien, Aliens, The Terminator, Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Predator and RoboCop as subconscious influences. The director said, "I don't know whether the film has that feeling or not for the audience, but I wanted it to have that harsh 1980s kind of vibe—I didn't want it to feel glossy and slick."Because of the amount of hand-held shooting required for the film, the producers and crew decided to shoot using the digital Red One 4K camera. Cinematographer Trent Opaloch used nine digital Red Ones owned by Peter Jackson for primary filming. According to HD Magazine, District 9 was shot on RED One cameras using build 15, Cooke S4 primes and Angenieux zooms. The documentary-style and CCTV-style cam footage was shot on the Sony EX1/EX3 XDCAM-HD. Additionally, the post-production team was warned that the most RED Camera footage they could handle a day was about an hour and a half. When that got to five hours a day additional resources were brought in, and 120 terabytes of data was filled.


=== Creative Background ===
This film is essentially an expanded version of director Neill Blomkamp's 2005 work. The original short film, titled "Alive in Joburg" was written and directed by Neill Blomkamp. It narrates the conflict between aliens and local residents in Johannesburg (referred to as Joburg). Sharlto Copley, who starred in "Alive in Joburg," also became the lead actor in "District 9." Interestingly, the movie was developed with six different endings, but only one was ultimately used.
During the same period, Peter Jackson was planning to produce a film adaptation of the Xbox game "Halo" and had chosen Neill Blomkamp as the director. However, due to the interests of major corporations, the project was indefinitely shelved. Believing in Blomkamp's talent, Peter Jackson decided to fund a new project, investing 30 million dollars for Blomkamp to direct a film of his own choosing. This led to the creation of "District 9."


=== Content Mapping ===
The alien settlement depicted in the film was actually shot in an African slum, lending a gritty realism to the setting. Except for the main characters' dwelling and the alien protagonist Christopher's hut, which were temporarily constructed, all the slum shacks were real locations. The depiction of aliens dismembering wild beasts and their fondness for cat food draws a parallel to the desperate living conditions in slums, where inhabitants often rely on carrion or cat food for sustenance.
The idea of aliens eating cat food was inspired by a crew member who used cat food as bait for shrimp during the film's production. Additionally, the narrative of the aliens' relocation in the film mirrors a real event: the demolition of a Johannesburg slum and the subsequent forced relocation of its residents to a government-built settlement area.
This approach in the movie not only adds a layer of authenticity but also serves as a powerful metaphor for the socio-economic issues faced by marginalized communities.


=== Visual effects ===
The aliens in District 9 were designed by Weta Workshop, and the design was executed by Image Engine.Blomkamp wanted the aliens to maintain both humane and barbaric features in the design of the creatures. According to Terri Tatchell, the director's writing partner, "They are not appealing, they are not cute, and they don't tug at our heartstrings. He went for a scary, hard, warrior-looking alien, which is much more of a challenge." The look of the alien, with its exoskeleton-crustacean hybrid and crab-like shells, was meant to initially evoke a sense of disgust from viewers but as the story progresses, the audience was meant to sympathize with these creatures who had such human-like emotions and characteristics. Blomkamp established criteria for the design of the aliens. He wanted the species to be insect-like but also bipedal. The director wanted the audience to relate to the aliens and said of the restriction on the creature design, "Unfortunately, they had to be human-esque because our psychology doesn't allow us to really empathize with something unless it has a face and an anthropomorphic shape. Like if you see something that's four-legged, you think it's a dog; that's just how we're wired ... If you make a film about an alien force, which is the oppressor or aggressor, and you don't want to empathize with them, you can go to town. So creatively that's what I wanted to do but story-wise, I just couldn't."Blomkamp originally sought to have Weta Digital design the creatures, but the company was busy with effects for Avatar. The director then decided to choose a Vancouver-based effects company because he anticipated making films there in the future and because British Columbia offered a tax credit. Blomkamp met with Image Engine and considered them "a bit of a gamble" since the company had not pursued a project as large as a feature film. Aside from the aliens appearing on the operating table in the medical lab, all of them were created using CGI visual effects.Weta Digital designed the 21⁄2-kilometer-diameter mothership and the drop ship, while the exo-suit and the little pets were designed by The Embassy Visual Effects. Zoic Studios performed overflow 2D work. On-set live special effects were created by MXFX. Some of the software used for the visual effects were Autodesk Softimage.


=== Music ===

The music for District 9 was scored by Canadian composer Clinton Shorter, who spent three weeks preparing for the film. Director Neill Blomkamp wanted a "raw and dark" score, but one that maintained its South African roots. This was a challenge for Shorter, who found much of the South African music he worked with to be optimistic and joyful. Unable to get the African drums to sound dark and heavy, Shorter used a combination of taiko drums and synthesized instruments for the desired effects, with the core African elements of the score conveyed in the vocals and smaller percussion. Both the score and soundtrack feature music and vocals from Kwaito artists.


== Marketing ==
Sony Pictures launched a "Humans Only" marketing campaign to promote District 9. Sony's marketing team designed its promotional material to emulate the segregational billboards that appear throughout the film. Billboards, banners, posters, and stickers were thus designed with the theme in mind, and the material was spread across public places such as bus stops in various cities, including "humans only" signs in certain locations and providing toll-free numbers to report "non-human" activity. This marketing strategy was designed to provoke reactions in its target audience (namely, sci-fi fans and people concerned with discrimination), hence the use of obviously fake segregational propaganda.
According to Dwight Caines, Sony's president of digital marketing, an estimated 33,000 phone calls were made to the toll-free numbers during a two-week period with 2,500 of them leaving voicemails with reports of alien sightings. Promotional material was also presented at the 2008 San Diego Comic-Con, advertising the website D-9.com, which had an application presented by the fictional Multi-National United (MNU). The website had a local alert system for Johannesburg (the film's setting), news feeds, behavior recommendations, and rules and regulations. Other viral websites for the film were also launched, including an MNU website with a countdown timer for the film's release, an anti-MNU blog run by fictional alien character Christopher Johnson, and an MNU-sponsored educational website. An online game for District 9 has also been made where players can choose to be a human or an alien. Humans are MNU agents on patrol trying to arrest or kill aliens. Aliens try to avoid capture from MNU agents whilst searching for alien canisters. This digital approach to marketing follows a rising trend among digital natives who develop marketing trends and techniques which are appropriate to the digital age, and is cost-efficient due to its reliance on social media and communications. This breaking down and circumvention of existing marketing structures follows postmodernist theory in cinema.WETA released in July 2010 Christopher Johnson and Son as sculptures.According to the American Humane Association, the film displays an unauthorized "no animals were harmed" end credit, which is a registered trademark of the group.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
District 9 grossed US$115.6 million from the United States and Canada, with a worldwide total of $210,819,611, against a production budget of US$30 million.It opened in 3,048 theatres in Canada and the United States on 14 August 2009, and the film ranked first at the weekend box office with an opening gross of US$37.4 million. Among comparable science fiction films in the past, its opening attendance was slightly less than the 2008 film Cloverfield and the 1997 film Starship Troopers. The audience demographic for District 9 was 64 percent male and 57 percent people 25 years or older. The film stood out as a summer film that generated strong business despite little-known casting. Its opening success was attributed to the studio's unusual marketing campaign. In the film's second weekend, it dropped 49% in revenue while competing against the opening film Inglourious Basterds for the male audience, as Sony Pictures attributed the "good hold" to District 9's strong playability.The film enjoyed similar success in the UK with an opening gross of £2,288,378 showing at 447 cinemas.


=== Critical response ===
Rotten Tomatoes gives District 9 an approval rating of 90% based on 314 critic reviews and 82% based on 250,000+ audience reviews, with an average score of 7.80/10. The website's consensus states, "Technically brilliant and emotionally wrenching, District 9 has action, imagination, and all the elements of a thoroughly entertaining science-fiction classic." On Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the film has a score of 81 based on 36 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale.Sara Vilkomerson of The New York Observer wrote, "District 9 is the most exciting science fiction movie to come along in ages; definitely the most thrilling film of the summer; and quite possibly the best film I've seen all year." Christy Lemire from the Associated Press was impressed by the plot and thematic content, claiming that "District 9 has the aesthetic trappings of science fiction but it's really more of a character drama, an examination of how a man responds when he's forced to confront his identity during extraordinary circumstances." Entertainment Weekly's Lisa Schwarzbaum described it as "... madly original, cheekily political, [and] altogether exciting..."Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three stars out of four and praised it for "giving us aliens to remind us not everyone who comes in a spaceship needs to be angelic, octopod or stainless steel", but complained that "the third act is disappointing, involving standard shoot-out action. No attempt is made to resolve the situation, and if that's a happy ending, I've seen happier. Despite its creativity, the film remains space opera and avoids the higher realms of science-fiction."Josh Tyler of Cinema Blend says the film is unique in interpretation and execution, but considers it to be a knockoff of the 1988 film Alien Nation.IGN listed District 9 at No. 24 on a list of the Top 25 Sci-Fi Films of All Time.From the Chicago Tribune: "As this summer nears its end, this movie has made the entire Hollywood feel ashamed."
From The New York Times: "A forward-thinking film, a fable about life."
From USA Today: "It proves that science fiction doesn't need to be star-studded, overly budgeted, visually captivating, or purely entertaining."
From The Hollywood Reporter: "A truly genuine, original science fiction movie that captivates you from the start, making the audience unable to stop watching until the very end."


=== Political response ===
Nigeria's Information Minister Dora Akunyili asked movie cinemas around the country to either ban the film or edit out specific references to the country because of the film's negative depiction of the Nigerian characters as criminals and cannibals. Letters of complaint were sent to the producer and distributor of the film demanding an apology. She also said the gang leader Obesandjo is almost identical in spelling and pronunciation to the surname of former president Olusegun Obasanjo. The film was later banned in Nigeria; the Nigerian Film and Video Censors Board was asked to prevent cinemas from showing the film and also to confiscate it.Hakeem Kae-Kazim, a Nigerian-born British actor, also criticised the portrayal of Nigerians in the film, telling the Beeld (an Afrikaans-language daily newspaper): "Africa is a beautiful place and the problems it does have can not be shown by such a small group of people."However, the Malawian actor Eugene Khumbanyiwa, who played Obesandjo, has stated that the Nigerians in the cast of District 9 were not perturbed by the portrayal of Nigerians in the film, and that the film should not be taken literally: "It's a story, you know. It's not like Nigerians do eat aliens. Aliens don't even exist in the first place."Teju Cole, a Nigerian-American writer, has commented that the "one-dimensionality of the Nigerian characters is striking," even when taking into account that District 9 is meant to be a fable. He suggests two possible explanations for Blomkamp's narrative choice: first, that it is meant to reflect anti-foreigner sentiment within South Africa, or second, that it simply represents an oversight on Blomkamp's part.In 2013, the film was one of several discussed by David Sirota in Salon.com in an article concerning white savior narratives in film.Alexandra Heller Nicholas discusses Wikus's self-identity in District 9 as problematic due to him being a white man and the hero of the film. Nicholas argues that a white saviour "disempowers the film’s allegory to apartheid that comments on the corruption of the South African government" as well as the discrimination black South Africans dealt with during and post-apartheid. Making Wikus the "white savior" backtracks from the main message of District 9 which is to show the audience the detrimental effects "of colonialism brought by the Western world". Another point Nicholas makes is that District 9 is a "stereotypical White Saviour film". She states that the plot is about a white man working for the government, who has roots "in South Africa's apartheid culture", involuntarily joining the "victims of apartheid". In this case, instead of black people, it's prawns.It has been argued that Wikus's grotesque transformation is indicative of the fact that "While biological discourses of racial subhumanity might have been expunged from public knowledges in the postapartheid nation, contemporary South Africa continues to be structured according to the binary that undergirds such narratives."


=== Accolades ===

District 9 was named one of the top 10 independent films of 2009 by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures. The film also won The Ray Bradbury Nebula Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation. The film received four Academy Awards nominations for: Best Motion Picture of the Year (Peter Jackson and Carolynne Cunningham), Best Writing, Adapted Screenplay (Neill Blomkamp and Terri Tatchell), Best Achievement in Film Editing (Julian Clarke) and Best Achievement in Visual Effects (Dan Kaufman, Peter Muyzers, Robert Habros and Matt Aitken); seven British Academy Film Awards nominations: Best Cinematography (Trent Opaloch), Best Screenplay – Adapted (Neill Blomkamp and Terri Tatchell), Best Editing (Julian Clarke), Best Production Design (Philip Ivey, Guy Potgieter), Best Sound (Brent Burge, Chris Ward, Dave Whitehead, Michael Hedges and Ken Saville), Best Special Visual Effects (Dan Kaufman, Peter Muyzers, Robert Habros and Matt Aitken) and Best Director (Neill Blomkamp); five Broadcast Film Critics Association nominations: Best Makeup (Won), Best Screenplay, Adapted (Neill Blomkamp and Terri Tatchell), Best Sound, Best Visual Effects and Best Action Movie; and one Golden Globe nomination: Best Screenplay – Motion Picture (Neill Blomkamp and Terri Tatchell).It is the fifth TriStar Pictures film ever nominated for Best Picture at the Academy Awards (the previous four were As Good as It Gets, Jerry Maguire, Bugsy and Places in the Heart). It won the 2009 Bradbury Award from the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America.


== Release ==
District 9 held its World Premiere 23 July 2009 at the Reading Gaslamp 15 at San Diego Comic-Con, with Copley, Blomkamp and Jackson in attendance. It was released by TriStar Pictures on 14 August 2009.


== Home media ==
The Blu-ray Disc and region 1 code widescreen edition of District 9 as well as the 2-disc special-edition version on DVD was released on 22 December 2009 by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment. The DVD and Blu-ray Disc includes the documentary "The Alien Agenda: A Filmmaker's Log" and the special features "Metamorphosis: The Transformation of Wikus", "Innovation: Acting and Improvisation", "Conception and Design: Creating the World of District 9", and "Alien Generation: Visual Effects".The demo for the video game God of War III featured in the 2009 Electronic Entertainment Expo is also included with the Blu-ray release of District 9 playable on the Sony PlayStation 3.District 9 was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray on 13 October 2020.


== Future ==
On 1 August 2009, two weeks before District 9 was released to cinemas, Neill Blomkamp hinted that he intended to make a sequel if the film was successful enough. During an interview on the Rude Awakening 94.7 Highveld Stereo breakfast radio show, he alluded to it, saying "There probably will be." Nevertheless, he revealed that his next project is unrelated to the District 9 universe.
In an interview with Rotten Tomatoes, Blomkamp stated that he was "totally" hoping for a follow-up: "I haven't thought of a story yet but if people want to see another one, I'd love to do it."
Blomkamp has posed the possibility of the next movie in the series being a prequel.
In an interview with Empire magazine posted on 28 April 2010, Sharlto Copley suggested that a follow-up, while very likely, would be about two years away, given his and Neill Blomkamp's current commitments.In an interview with IGN in June 2013, Blomkamp said, "I really want to make a District 9 sequel. I genuinely do. The problem is I have a bunch of ideas and stuff that I want to make. I'm relatively new to this—I'm about to make my third film, and now the pattern that I'm starting to realise is very true is that you lock yourself into a film beyond the film you're currently working on. But it just doesn't work for me." Referring to a potential sequel, Blomkamp said "[he] want[s] to make District 10 at some point."On February 26, 2021, Neill Blomkamp revealed on his official Twitter that development was moving ahead on a script for a sequel, titled District 10, with Sharlto Copley and Terri Tatchell co-writing the screenplay with him.On August 19, 2022, Sharlto Copley said in an interview that District 10 was still in discussions; that both he and Blomkamp had written drafts for it, and that the film would probably have a chance once Blomkamp was done shooting Gran Turismo.In August 2023, Blomkamp was asked about a District 9 sequel while promoting Gran Turismo and hinted at the project being shelved indefinitely. "I don’t know if it’s getting made or not," Blomkamp told Brian Davids of The Hollywood Reporter. "I don’t know if I even want to make that right now, but at some point down the line, it’ll probably get made."


== See also ==
List of films featuring powered exoskeletons
Casspir
Parktown prawn


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
District 9 at AllMovie
District 9 at IMDb 
District 9 at the TCM Movie Database
District 9 at Rotten Tomatoes
District 9 at Metacritic 
District 9 at Box Office Mojo10 Squadron SAAF
10th BRICS summit
11 Diagonal Street
120 End Street
12 Angry Men (1957 film)
15 Reception Depot
15th BRICS summit
1946 African Mine Workers' Union strike
1956 Treason Trial
1957 Alexandra bus boycott
1992 South Africa vs New Zealand rugby union match
1995 Rugby World Cup
1995 Rugby World Cup final
1time
2000X
2002 Soweto bombings
2003 Cricket World Cup
2003 Cricket World Cup final
2010 FIFA World Cup
2010 FIFA World Cup final
2016 Johannesburg flood
2018–2021 Southern African drought
2019 Johannesburg riots
2021 South African unrest
2022 Soweto shooting
2023 Boksburg gas leak
2023 Johannesburg building fire
21 South African Infantry Battalion
2 Locating Regiment
35 Engineer Support Regiment
36 Houghton Drive
3rd Armoured Personnel Carrier Squadron
46 South African Brigade
4 Squadron SAAF
5FM
6 Medical Battalion Group
72 Motorised Brigade (South Africa)
73 Motorised Brigade (South Africa)
7 South African Infantry Division
7th Street (Johannesburg)
947 (radio station)
A2X Markets
ACM Gold
AECI
AFDA, The School for the Creative Economy
ATKV
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Man and a Woman
Abbotsford, Johannesburg
Abe Bailey Nature Reserve
Absa Bank Limited
Absa Group Limited
Absa Tower
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Academy Awards
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Access Bank South Africa
Acid mine drainage
ActionAid
ActionSA
Adcock Ingram
Aerolift
Aeroton
Africa's Young Entrepreneurs
African Alliance Investment Bank
African Bank Limited
African Christian Democratic Party
African Communist
African Explosives
African Independent Congress
African International Airways
African Leadership Academy
African National Congress
African National Congress Veterans' League
African National Congress Women's League
African National Congress Youth League
African Parks
African People's Convention
African Rainbow Minerals
African Union
Afrihost
Afrikanerbond
Afrotropical realm
Agang South Africa
Agricultural Food and Allied Democratic Workers Union
Ahmed Kathrada Foundation
AirQuarius Aviation
Airdlin
Airlink
Airlink Cargo
Airports Company South Africa
Al Jama-ah
Alan Manor
Alberton, South Africa
Alberton Commando
Albertskroon
Albertville, Gauteng
Aldara Park
Alexander Forbes Group Holdings
Alexander Theatre (Johannesburg)
Alexandra, Gauteng
Alexandra, South Africa
Alexandra Renewal Project
Alexandra Stadium (South Africa)
Alexkor
Alfonso Cuarón
Alhambra Theatre (Johannesburg)
Alien (film)
Alien Nation (film)
Aliens (film)
Alive in Joburg
AllMovie
All Joy Foods
Allen Glen High School
Allen Grove, Gauteng
Aloe Ridge Game Reserve
AltX
Alternate history
AmaBhungane
Amalgam, Gauteng
Ambitiouz Entertainment
American Film Market
American Humane Association
American International School of Johannesburg
Andesite Mountain Bushveld
Andrew Mlangeni Regiment
Andrew Stanton
Anglican Church of Southern Africa
Anglican Diocese of Johannesburg
Anglo-Boer War Memorial (Johannesburg)
AngloGold Ashanti
Anostostomatidae
Ansteys Building
Anti-Eviction Campaign
Anti-Privatisation Forum
Anti-materiel rifle
Apartheid
Apartheid Museum
Architecture of Johannesburg
Arena Holdings
Armoured personnel carrier
Arms industry
Arop House
Arrival (film)
ArrowLine Chinese Radio
Arthur Block Park
As Good as It Gets
Asa Resources Group
Ashton International College
Aspen Hills, Gauteng
Associated Press
Aston Manor, Kempton Park
Astor Mansions
Astra Lost in Space
Athletics South Africa
Athlone Boys' High School
Atholhurst
Atholl, Gauteng
Atholl Gardens
Atlas Commando
Atlas Oryx
Atlie F.C.
Auckland Park
Auckland Park Academy of Excellence
Auckland Park Theological Seminary
Aurora Private School
AutoTrader.co.za
Autodesk Softimage
Automobile Association of South Africa
Avalon Cemetery
Avatar (2009 film)
Aveng
Avia (airline)
Avis Southern Africa
Azaadville
Azanian People's Organisation
BCX (Business Connexion Group)
Baahubali 2: The Conclusion
Babylon 5
Back to the Future
Bad Taste
Bagleyston
Bakers (bakery)
Bambatha Rifles
Bank Zero
Banket (mining term)
Bantu Men's Social Centre
Bapsfontein
Baptist Church, Troyeville
Baptist Theological College of Southern Africa
Baptist Union of Southern Africa
Baptists
Barbeque Downs
Barbeque Downs Business Park
Barloworld Limited
Barnard Stadium
Barnato Park High School
Basil Green Motors
Basketball South Africa
Bassonia
Battle of Doornkop
Battle of Witpoort
Beacon Royal
Beasts of the Southern Wild
Beaulieu College
Bedfordview
Beeld
Beit Emanuel Progressive Synagogue
Bekkersdal
Belgravia, Gauteng
Bellevue, Gauteng
Bellevue East
Benh Zeitlin
Benmore Gardens
Benoni, South Africa
Benoni Commando
Benrose
Berario
Berea, Gauteng
Berea Fire Station
Bertrams, Gauteng
Beverley Gardens
Beyers Naudé Drive
Beyers Naudé Square
Bezuidenhout Valley
Bidorbuy
Bidvest Bank
Bidvest Group
Bidvest Stadium
Bidvest Wits F.C.
Big Bad Wolves
Bigshoes Foundation
Billboard
Biogeographic realm
Biome
Birch Acres
Birchleigh
Birchleigh North
Birdhaven, Gauteng
Birnam, Gauteng
Black Sash
Black Swan (film)
Blackheath, Gauteng
Blade Runner
Blairgowrie, Gauteng
Blesbokspruit
Blikkiesdorp
Blockhouses of the Second Anglo-Boer War
Bloubosrand
Blu-ray
Blue Hills, Gauteng
Blue Ribbon Award for Best Foreign Film
Blyvooruitzicht
Blyvooruitzicht mine
Bodacious Space Pirates
Boervolk Radio
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Boikarabelo
Boksburg
Boksburg Commando
Boksburg High School
Boksburg explosion
Bolt's Farm
Bonaero Park
Book fairs in South Africa
Booysens (Johannesburg)
Bopasenatla Secondary School
Bordeaux, Gauteng
Bosasa
Bosman Stadium
Bosmont
Bowls South Africa
Bowman Gilfillan
Box Office Mojo
Braamfontein
Braamfontein Explosion
Braamfontein Spruit
Braamfontein Werf
Bradbury Award
Braindead (film)
Brakpan
Brakpan Commando
Bramley, Gauteng
Bramley North
Bramley Park
Branson School of Entrepreneurship
Brazil (1985 film)
Bredell, Kempton Park
Bredell land occupation
Brendan McCarthy
Brenthurst Foundation
Brenthurst Gardens
Brenthurst Library
Bridle Park
British Academy Film Awards
British Board of Film Classification
British Columbia
British Film Institute
Brixton, Johannesburg
Brixton Reformed Church
Brixton Tower
Broadacres, Gauteng
Broadcast Film Critics Association
Bromhof
Bruma, Gauteng
Bryanbrink
Bryanston, Gauteng
Bryanston East, Gauteng
Bryanston High School
Bryanston West, Gauteng
Buccleuch, Gauteng
Bugsy
Bultfontein, Johannesburg
Bunting Road Campus Auckland Park
Bureau of the Pan-African Parliament
Bureaucrat
Burning (2018 film)
Bush Hill, Gauteng
Business Day (South Africa)
CCP Records
CEO
CIDA City Campus
CNA (bookstore)
CNBC Africa
Cadac (South Africa)
Calvinism
Camp Sizanani
Campuses of the University of the Witwatersrand
Cape Flats
Cape Town
Capitalist Party of South Africa
Carletonville
Carletonville Dolomite Grassland
Carlswald
Carlton Centre
Carlton Hotel (Johannesburg)
Carolynne Cunningham
Casspir
Castle Kyalami
Cathedral of Christ The King, Johannesburg
Cathedral of Sts. Constantine and Helen
Catholic Church
Caxton and CTP Publishers and Printers
Cecil Payne Stadium
Celestial Games
Cell C
CemAir
Central Gauteng women's cricket team
Central Johannesburg College
ChaiFM
Chamber of Mines Building
Chancellor House (building)
Chancellor House (company)
Channel Africa
Chappie (film)
Chapter nine institutions
Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital
Charly (1968 film)
Charter College (South Africa)
Chartwell, Gauteng
Chassidim Shul
Cheltondale
Chemical, Energy, Paper, Printing, Wood and Allied Workers' Union
Chernobyl
Chicago Sun-Times
Chicken Licken (restaurant)
Children of Fire International
Chislehurston
Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital
Chris Hani Memorial
Christian Brothers' College, Boksburg
Christopher Nolan
Christy Lemire
Chrisville
Circle Court, Johannesburg
CityVarsity
City Deep, Gauteng
City Power
City Press (South Africa)
City and Suburban, Gauteng
City and Suburban Industrial, Gauteng
City of Ekurhuleni Disaster and Emergency Management Services
City of Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality
City of Ekurhuleni elections
City of Johannesburg Emergency Services
City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality
City of Johannesburg elections
Civicus
Claremont, Johannesburg
Clinton Shorter
Closed-circuit television
Clover Industries
Cloverfield
Coat of arms of Johannesburg
Comair (South Africa)
Comazar
Command Airways (South Africa)
Commando System (South Africa)
Commission for Gender Equality
Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities
Commissioner Street (Johannesburg)
Communication Workers Union (South Africa)
Community & Individual Development Association
Computer-generated imagery
Concert in the Park (South Africa)
Concor
Congress of South African Students
Congress of South African Trade Unions
Congress of the People (1955)
Congress of the People (South African political party)
Consolidated Building
Constantia Kloof
Constitution Hill, Johannesburg
Constitutional Court of South Africa
Conversation Piece (film)
Cooper's Cave
Corner House (Johannesburg)
Corona Lodge
Coronationville, Gauteng
Cottesloe, Johannesburg
Country Life Park
Country View
Courts of South Africa
Cowboy Bebop
Cowdray Park, Gauteng
Cradle of Humankind
Craighall
Craighall Park
Cramerview
Crawford College, Lonehill
Crawford College, Sandton
Cresslawn
Cresta, Gauteng
Cresta Shopping Centre
Cricket South Africa
Crocodile River (Limpopo)
Crosby, Gauteng
Crossing the Line (2008 film)
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon
Crown, Gauteng
Crown Gardens
Crown North
Crowthorne, Gauteng
Croydon, Kempton Park
Cuthberts Building
Cybatar
Cyrildene
DLO Energy Resources Group
DRDGOLD Limited
DVD
DVD region code
Dagga Couple
Dagga Party
Daily Maverick
Daily Sun (South Africa)
Daily Voice (South African newspaper)
Dainfern
Damelin
Damelin Correspondence College
Dancer in the Dark
Daniel Brink Park
Daniels (directors)
Darrenwood
Datatec
Daveyton
David James (South African actor)
David James (actor, born 1972)
David Sirota
David Webster House
Dawn Park
Death and state funeral of Nelson Mandela
Debonairs Pizza
Delft, Cape Town
Delta Park (Johannesburg)
Democratic Alliance (South Africa)
Democratic Left Front
Demonic (2021 film)
Denel Aeronautics
Denel NTW-20
Deneys Reitz
Deneys Reitz Inc
Denis Villeneuve
Dennehof, Gauteng
Dennō Coil
Denver, Johannesburg
Deutsche Internationale Schule Johannesburg
Development Bank of Southern Africa
Dewetshof
Die Arbeider en arm boer
Die Hard
Diepkloof
Diepsloot
Dimension Data
Dinner for Adele
Diocese of Christ the King
Diocese of the Highveld
Dis-Chem
Discovery Limited
District 9 (disambiguation)
District 9 (soundtrack)
District Six
Dobsonville
Dobsonville Shopping Centre
Dobsonville Stadium
Doctor Who
Documentary film
Doi (identifier)
Donald Mackay Park
Doornfontein
Doornfontein Synagogue
Doornkop
Dora Akunyili
Dorkay House
Douglasdale, Gauteng
Dr Xuma house
Dreamgirls (film)
Driefontein, Gauteng
Driefontein mine
Drieziek
Drimolen
Droste Park
Drum (South African magazine)
Duduza
Dunhill, Gauteng
Dunkeld, Gauteng
Dunkeld West
E-toll (South Africa)
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
ENCA
ENSafrica
EOH Holdings
Earth Summit 2002
Earthlife Africa
East Driefontein
East Park Commando
East Rand
East Rand Mine
East of Eden (film)
Eastcliff, Johannesburg
Eastern Highveld Grassland
Eastern Promises
Eastern Temperate Freshwater Wetlands
Easterns (cricket team)
Easterns women's cricket team
Eastgate Shopping Centre, Johannesburg
Ebony Park
Economic Freedom Fighters
Ecoregion
Edcon
Edenburg, Gauteng
Edenvale, South Africa
Edenvale Commando
Edleen
Education Facilitators
Eerste Alternatiewe Afrikaanse Rockkonsert
Egoli: Place of Gold
Egoli Air
Egoli Granite Grassland
Egoli Magic
Ekurhuleni FM
Elandspark
Elandsrand
Elcedes
Eldorado Park, Gauteng
Electron, Gauteng
Electronic Entertainment Expo 2009
Elladoone
Ellis Park Arena
Ellis Park Stadium
Ellis Park Stadium disaster
Elsburg
Elton Hill
Elysium (film)
Emmarentia
Emmarentia Dam
Empire (film magazine)
Empire Exhibition, South Africa
Encounters Festival South Africa
Endstead
Ennerdale, South Africa
Entertainment Weekly
Entomologist
Epsom Downs, Gauteng
Erand
Eric Heisserer
Eskom
Eskom Centre
Esther Park
Etwatwa
Eugene Wanangwa Khumbanyiwa
Evans Park
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Evolution Group (South Africa)
Evolutionary Studies Institute
Exchange Square (Johannesburg)
Exclusive Books
Executive Aerospace
Executive Council of Gauteng
FNB Stadium
Fable
Fairland, Gauteng
Fairmount, Gauteng
Fairview, Gauteng
Fairway, Gauteng
Fairwood, Gauteng
Falcons (rugby union)
Family Tree Records
Famous Brands
Farmall, Gauteng
Feature film
Federal Air
Federation of Unions of South Africa
FeesMustFall
Fellside, Gauteng
Ferndale, Gauteng
Ferreirasdorp
Field of Dreams
Fietas Museum
Film Resource Unit
Financial Mail
Fire Walker
FirstRand
First National Bank (South Africa)
Flag of Johannesburg
Flags of Our Fathers (film)
Flashdance
Florida, Gauteng
Florida Glen
Florida Hills
FlySafair
Fly Blue Crane
Fochville
Fontainebleau, Gauteng
Forbesdale
Forbidden Games
Fordsburg
Fordsburg Reformed Church
Fordsburg Square
Forest Hill, Gauteng
Forest Town, Gauteng
Forgotten Silver
Found footage (film technique)
Foundation of Tertiary Institutions of the Northern Metropolis
Fourways
Fourways Mall
Framton
Fran Walsh
Franklin Roosevelt Park
Free Market Foundation
Freedom Charter
Freightdynamics
French Engineering Works
Friedenskirche (Hillbrow)
Galaxy Quest
Gallagher Convention Centre
Gallo Manor
Gallo Record Company
Gamera: Guardian of the Universe
Gamera 2: Attack of Legion
Gandhi Square
Gauteng
Gauteng (cricket team)
Gauteng Department of Education
Gauteng Department of Roads and Transport
Gauteng Division
Gauteng Institute for Architecture
Gauteng Provincial Legislature
Gauteng Shale Mountain Bushveld
Gautrain
Gay and Lesbian Organization of Witwatersrand
Gene Wilder
Geological Society of South Africa
George Lucas
George Miller (filmmaker)
Germiston
Germiston Callies F.C.
Germiston Commando
Germiston High School
Germiston Stadium
Gervaise (film)
Get Out
Giant Blackpool
Gillview
Gimme Hope Jo'anna
Girls und Panzer der Film
Gladysvale Cave
Glen Austin
Glen Marais
Glenadrienne
Glenanda
Glendower Golf Club
Glenesk
Glenhazel
Glenvista
Global Aviation
Global Change Institute
Global Water Foundation
God of War III
Godzilla Singular Point
Gold Fields
Gold Reef City
Gold Reef Mountain Bushveld
Golden Globe Award
Golden Lions
Good Omens (TV series)
Goodman Gallery
Gordon Institute of Business Science
Gran Torino
Gran Turismo (film)
Grand Central Airport
Grand Central Water Tower Midrand
Gravity (2013 film)
Grayston Pedestrian and Cycle Bridge
Great Synagogue (Johannesburg)
Greater Johannesburg
Greek Orthodox Church
Greenside, Gauteng
Greenside High School
Greenstone Hill
Gresswold
Greymont
Guardian Weekly
Guardians of the Galaxy (film)
Guillermo del Toro
Gumboot dance
Gunbuster
Gunparade March
Haasgat
Haddon, Gauteng
Hakeem Kae-Kazim
Halfway Gardens
Halfway House Estate
Halo (franchise)
Halo (series)
Hand-held camera
Harlan Ellison
Harmony Gold (mining)
Hawkins Estate
Hayao Miyazaki
Headhunters (film)
Headway Hill
Heavenly Creatures
Hector Pieterson Museum
Hekro Towers
Helen Joseph Hospital
Helen Suzman Foundation
Helpmekaar Kollege
Hennops River
Heriotdale
Hidden Figures
Highlands, Johannesburg
Highlands North, Gauteng
Highpoint Hillbrow
Highveld
Highveld Alluvial Vegetation
Highveld grasslands
Hillbrow
Hillbrow Tower
History of Johannesburg
Hollard Group
Holy Trinity Catholic Church, Braamfontein
Homestead Park, Gauteng
Hot 1027
Houghton Estate
Houghton Heights
House Brunton
House Hains
Houtkoppen
Howl's Moving Castle (film)
Hoërskool Alberton
Hoërskool Dinamika
Hoërskool Florida
Hoërskool Marais Viljoen
Hoërskool Monument
Hoërskool Voortrekker (Boksburg)
Huddle Park (Johannesburg)
Humanity (virtue)
Hunter Group
Huntersfield Stadium
Hurl Park
Hurlingham, Gauteng
Hurlingham Gardens
Hyde Park, Gauteng
Hyde Park Corner (shopping centre)
Hyde Park High School (South Africa)
Hyundai Automotive South Africa
IGN
IIE MSA
IMDb (identifier)
IMM Graduate School
ISBN (identifier)
IVeri Payment Technologies
IWombe Anti-Aircraft Regiment
Illovo, Gauteng
Image Engine
Impala Platinum
Imperial Air Cargo
Imperial Bank South Africa
Imperial Lions
Imperial Military Hospital, Baragwanath
In the City (South African festival)
Inadan (city)
Inanda, Gauteng
Inception
Incredible Connection
Industrial Water Cooling
Industrial Workers of the World (South Africa)
Industrial and Mining Water Research Unit
Infernal Affairs
Inglourious Basterds
Inner City, Johannesburg
Inscape Design College
Interair South Africa
Interlink Airlines
Internet Solutions
Investec
Isando
Isuzu Trucks South Africa
Ivory Park
J. Michael Straczynski
JCI Limited
JFK (film)
JSE Limited
JVW F.C.
Jac Schaeffer
Jack Brown Genius
Jacob Zuma Foundation
Jacob Zuma rape trial
James Cameron
James Gunn
James Hall Transport Museum
James Mpanza House
James Schamus
Jameson Raid
Jamiatul Ulama South Africa
Jan Hofmeyer
Jan Smuts Avenue
Japanese School of Johannesburg
Japari School
Jason Cope
Jed Brophy
Jeppe High School for Boys
Jeppe High School for Girls
Jeppestown
Jeppestown South
Jerry Maguire
Jersey Boys (film)
Jewish Report
Jim Reardon
Joburg Art Fair
Joburg Ballet
Joburg Ladies Open
Joburg Open
Joburg Super Kings
Joburg Theatre
Joe Slovo, Cape Town
Johannesburg
Johannesburg, South Africa
Johannesburg-Durban High Speed Rail
Johannesburg Art Gallery
Johannesburg Beth Din
Johannesburg Botanical Garden
Johannesburg CBD
Johannesburg Central Police Station
Johannesburg City Hall
Johannesburg City Library
Johannesburg City Parks
Johannesburg Declaration
Johannesburg East Commando
Johannesburg East Reformed Church (NGK)
Johannesburg Festival Overture
Johannesburg Institute for Advanced Study
Johannesburg International Motor Show
Johannesburg Light Horse Regiment
Johannesburg Muslim School
Johannesburg North Reformed Church (NGK)
Johannesburg Park station
Johannesburg Philharmonic Orchestra
Johannesburg Planetarium
Johannesburg Reform Committee
Johannesburg Reformed Church (GKSA)
Johannesburg Reformed Church (NGK)
Johannesburg Regiment
Johannesburg Ring Road
Johannesburg Roads Agency
Johannesburg South Africa Temple
Johannesburg Stadium
Johannesburg Sun Hotel
Johannesburg Trades Hall
Johannesburg West Commando
Johannesburg Youth Orchestra
Johannesburg Zoo
Johannesburg freeways
Johannesburg train crash
John Sumner (actor born 1951)
Joint Security Area (film)
Joker (2019 film)
Jomo Cosmos F.C.
Jonás Cuarón
Jordan Peele
Joss Whedon
Joubert Park
Jozi Cats
Jozi FM
Jozi Nuggets
Judith's Paarl
Jukskei Park
Jukskei River
Julian Clarke
Juliwe Cemetery
Jurassic Park (film)
KDC mine
Kaalfontein
Kaapvaal Craton
Kabelo Gwamanda
Kagiso
Kaizer Chiefs F.C.
Kalawa Jazmee Records
Kamen Rider Kuuga
Kanana Park
Kasie FM 97.1
Katlehong
Kaya FM
Ke-Ditselana Tourism and Multi-Cultural Village
Keep Left (South Africa)
Kelvin Power Station
Kemono Friends
Kempton Park, Gauteng
Kempton Park, South Africa
Kempton Park Commando
Kempton Park West
Kenilworth, Johannesburg
Kenneth Nkosi
Kensington, Gauteng
Kensington B
Kentview, Johannesburg
Kerk Street Mosque
Kew, Gauteng
Khanya College
Kholvad House
Khutsong
Khyber Rock
Kibler Park
Kibo Gauteng Thermal Power Station
Killarney, Johannesburg
Killarney Film Studios
Kimberley House
Kine Centre
King David Schools, Johannesburg
King Edward VII School, Johannesburg
King Kong (2005 film)
Kingsmead College
Kingsway Campus Auckland Park
Kingsway Mansions, Johannesburg
Kirchoff's Building
Klevehill Park
Klip River
Klipriviersberg
Klipriviersberg Estate
Klipriviersberg Nature Reserve
Kliptown
Kloofendal Nature Reserve
Knights of Da Gama
Kollel Bet Mordechai
Kollel Yad Shaul
Kopanang mine
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kromdraai Conservancy
Kromdraai fossil site
Krugersdorp
Krugersdorp Commando
Krugersdorp Game Reserve
Kulula.com
Kusasalethu mine
KwaThema
KwaThema Stadium
Kwaito
Kweneng' Ruins
Kya Sand
Kya Sands, Johannesburg
Kyalami
Kyalami Agricultural Holdings
Kyalami Business Park
Kyalami Estates
L.A. Confidential (film)
La Rochelle, Johannesburg
La Strada
Labour Appeal Court of South Africa
Labour Court of South Africa
Lake View Estate
Lakeside, Johannesburg
Land Systems OMC
Landless People's Movement
Langaville
Langlaagte North
Langlaagte Reformed Church
Langlaagte Stamp Mill
Lanseria International Airport
Lauriston Court
Lawley, South Africa
Lema (company)
Lenasia
Lenasia Muslim School
Lenasia Stadium
Lenny (film)
Lenong Regiment
Leratong Hospital
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Lesaka Technologies
Lesedi Cultural Village
Lesotho Highlands Water Project
Let the Right One In (film)
Liberty Holdings Limited
Liefde en Vrede
Life Esidimeni scandal
Life Is Beautiful
Lilies of the Field (1963 film)
Lindberg Park
Linden, Gauteng
Linden Reformed Church
Lindfield House
Lindley, Gauteng
Linksfield, Johannesburg
Linmeyer
Lions (United Rugby Championship)
List of accolades received by District 9
List of companies traded on the JSE
List of films featuring powered exoskeletons
List of tallest buildings in Johannesburg
List of vegetation types of South Africa
Little Foot
Littlefillan
Live 8 concert, Johannesburg
Live Earth concert, Johannesburg
Livestock Wealth
Logistics House
Lombardy East
London House (Johannesburg)
Lone Hill
Lorentzville
Louis Botha Avenue
LoveLife South Africa
Lubavitch Yeshiva Gedolah of Johannesburg
Lucy Alibar
Luma Arcade
Lusitano F.C. (South Africa)
Lutheranism
Luthuli House
Lyceum College
Lycée Jules Verne (South Africa)
Lyme Park, Gauteng
M-Net
M-Net Series
M. Night Shyamalan
M1 (Johannesburg)
M2 (Johannesburg)
MTN Group
M Tigers F.C.
Macross Frontier
Mad Max: Fury Road
Mad Max 2
Madhya Kailash Temple, Midrand
Magaliesberg
Magaliesberg Biosphere Reserve
Magaliesburg
Magaliessig
Mail & Guardian
Makhulong Stadium
Malanshof
Malapa Fossil Site, Cradle of Humankind
Malawi
Malibongwe Drive
Mall of Africa
Malvern, Gauteng
Mama wa Shōgaku 4 Nensei
Mandela House
Mandela Institute for Development Studies
Mandela and Tambo
Mango (airline)
Manners Mansions
Maponya Mall
Marble Towers
Marievale Bird Sanctuary
Marist Brothers Linmeyer
Mariston Hotel
Market Photo Workshop
Market Theatre (Johannesburg)
Markham Building
Marlboro, Gauteng
Marlboro (Gautrain station)
Marlboro Gardens
Maroeladal
Maronite Church
Marshalltown, Johannesburg
Martian Successor Nadesico: The Motion Picture – Prince of Darkness
Mary Fitzgerald Square
Mary Poppins (film)
Maryvale, Gauteng
Massmart
Mayfair, Johannesburg
Mayfield Park, Gauteng
Mayihlome News
Mayor of Ekurhuleni
Mayor of Johannesburg
Me (South African TV channel)
Meadowlands, Gauteng
Meadowlands Secondary School
Mecha
Meet the Feebles
Megawatt Park
Mehlareng Stadium
Mel Brooks
Melrose, Johannesburg
Melrose Estate
Melrose North
Melville, Johannesburg
Melville Koppies
Merafong City Local Municipality
Mercantile Bank (South Africa)
Meredale
Metacritic
Metorex
Metro FM
Metropolitan Routes in Johannesburg
Metrorail Gauteng
MiWay Insurance
Michael Mount Waldorf School
Michael Schur
Michelangelo Towers
Midrand
Midrand (Gautrain station)
Midrand Graduate Institute
Midridge Park
Milkor BXP
Mill Hill, Gauteng
Millgate Farm
Million Dollar Baby
Milpark
Milpark Education
Milpark Hospital
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Mind Sports South Africa
Mineral Revolution
Minerals Council South Africa
Mining Weekly
Minnaar's Cave
Mintails mine
Modderfontein (East Rand)
Modderfontein Commando
Modderfontein Stadium
Moffat View
Mogale City Local Municipality
Mohlakeng
Mohlakeng Stadium
Moletsane High School
Mondeor
Monsieur Verdoux
Monsters (2010 film)
Montane grasslands and shrublands
Montecasino
Moodie Hill
Moot Plains Bushveld
Morningside, Gauteng
Morningside Manor
Moroka Swallows F.C.
Morris Isaacson High School
Mortal Engines (film)
Motsetsi
Mountain View, Johannesburg
Mponeng Gold Mine
Mrs. Ples
Mugg & Bean
Mulbarton, Johannesburg
Muldersdrift
MultiChoice
Munghana Lonene FM
Municipal Police (South Africa)
Municipalities of South Africa
Munro Drive
Munsieville
Murder of Babita Deokaran
Murder of Mido Macia
Murray & Roberts
MuseuMAfricA
Music Industry Online
My Neighbor Totoro
Mystic River (film)
N12 (South Africa)
N12 Southern Bypass (Johannesburg)
N17 (South Africa)
N1 (South Africa)
N1 Western Bypass (Johannesburg)
N2 Gateway
N3 (South Africa)
N3 Eastern Bypass (Johannesburg)
Naledi High School
Naledi Theatre Awards
Nampak
Nando's
Nasrec
Natal Bank Building
Nathalie Boltt
National Airways Corporation
National Bank Building
National Board of Review
National Council of Trade Unions
National Education, Health and Allied Workers' Union
National Horseracing Authority
National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa
National Union of Mineworkers (South Africa)
Nationwide Airlines (South Africa)
Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (film)
Nebula Award for Best Script
Nedbank
Negative cost
Neil Gaiman
Neill Blomkamp
Nelson Mandela Bridge
Nelson Mandela Children's Fund
Nelson Mandela Children's Hospital
Nelson Mandela Mural by Shepard Fairey
Nelson Mandela Square
Neotel
Netcare
Never Ending Gardens
New Age (South African newspaper)
New Brighton, Johannesburg
New Centre, Gauteng
New Doornfontein
New Partnership for Africa's Development
New PowerChutes
New Zealand
Newlands, Johannesburg
Newtown, Johannesburg
Nick Boraine
Nico Lathouris
Nicole Perlman
Nietgedacht
Nigel, Gauteng
Nigel Commando
Nigeria
Nimrod Park
Nippon Club (Johannesburg)
Nizamiye Mosque
Nkosi's Haven
No Time to Die
Nomad Africa Magazine
Noordgesig
Noordwyk
Norkem Park
Norscot
Norse Air
North Champagne Estates
North Doornfontein
Northam Platinum
Northcliff
Northcliff High School
Northern Acres, Gauteng
Northern Provinces
Northgate, Gauteng
Northgate Shopping Centre, Johannesburg
Northmead Square
Northriding
Norwood, Gauteng
Nu Metro Cinemas
Nuclear holocaust
O. R. Tambo International Airport
OK Bazaars
OR Tambo Regiment
OTEL Telecoms
Oakdene, Johannesburg
Oaklands, Gauteng
Oats Studios
Oberholzer
Observatory, Johannesburg
Observatory Ridge, Johannesburg
Occupy South Africa
Oerder Park
Ohr Somayach, South Africa
Old Mutual
Old Randfontein mine
Old Wanderers
Olifantsfontein
Olifantsvlei Nature Reserve
Olivedale, Gauteng
Olusegun Obasanjo
On the Beach (1959 film)
Ophirton
Orange Farm
Orange Grove, Gauteng
Orchards Primary School
Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse
Oriental Plaza
Orlando, Soweto
Orlando East Public Library
Orlando Pirates F.C.
Orlando Power Station
Orlando Stadium
Ormonde, Gauteng
Orthodox Judaism
Osummit
Out In Africa South African Gay and Lesbian Film Festival
Oxford Shul
PAM Brink Stadium
POLAF
PPC Ltd.
PUTCO
Paarlshoop
Pacific Rim (film)
Pageview, Johannesburg
Paleotropical Kingdom
Palmietfontein Airport
Pan's Labyrinth
Pan-African Parliament
Pan Africanist Congress of Azania
Pan Africanist Student Movement of Azania
Paramount Group
Parasite (2019 film)
Park Central, Gauteng
Park Road Post
Parkhurst, Gauteng
Parkhurst Reformed Church
Parkmore
Parktown
Parktown Boys' High School
Parktown Convent
Parktown North
Parktown mansions
Parktown prawn
Parkview, Gauteng
Parkview Senior Primary School
Parkwood, Johannesburg
Paulshof
Percelia Estate
Pete Docter
Peter Jackson
Petervale
Phil Lord and Christopher Miller
Philippa Boyens
Philosophical Papers
Phiri, Soweto
Phoebus Apollo Aviation
Pholosong Hospital
Photo:
Phytochorion
Places in the Heart
Planetes
PlayStation 3
Plooysville
Plovers Lake
Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union
Pomona, Kempton Park
Ponte City
Ponte City Apartments
Postmodernism
Potgietersrus Rugby Stadium
Power FM (South Africa)
Predator (film)
Premier FMCG
Prequel
Presbytery of Egoli
President Ridge
President Street Power Station, Johannesburg
President Street Synagogue
Pride parades in South Africa
Primedia
Primrose, South Africa
Private military company
Project MUSE (identifier)
Prolecon
Protea Glen
Protea Glen Mall
Psychopathy
Puella Magi Madoka Magica
Pullinger Kop
Pulp Fiction
QED International
Queen Victoria Hospital (Johannesburg)
Quest for Fire (film)
Quizzical Pictures
R24 (South Africa)
R25 (South Africa)
R29 (South Africa)
R41 (South Africa)
R55 (South Africa)
R564 (South Africa)
R82 (South Africa)
RAMFest
RMB Holdings
RRR (film)
Rabie Ridge
Rabie Ridge Stadium
Racism
Radio 2000
Radio 702
Radio Sonder Grense
Radiopark
Radoma Court
Raedene Estate
Rahima Moosa House
Rahima Moosa Mother and Child Hospital
Rain (telecommunications)
Rakka (film)
Rand Airport
Rand Club
Rand Highveld Grassland
Rand Light Infantry
Rand Merchant Investment Holdings
Rand Rebellion
Rand Refinery
Rand Show
Rand Stadium
Rand Water
Rand Water Board Building
Rand West City Local Municipality
Randburg
Randburg Commando
Randburg Hockey Stadium
Randfontein
Randfontein mine
Randjesfontein Agricultural Holdings
Randjespark
Randlord
Randpark
Randpark Golf Club
Randpark Ridge
Randview
Rapport (newspaper)
Ratel IFV
Raumarais Park
Ray Bradbury Award
Red Digital Cinema
Red Square (Oriental Plaza)
Redhill School (Johannesburg)
Reform Judaism
Regenesys Business School
Regents Park, Gauteng
Regents Park Estate
Regiment University of the Witwatersrand
Regina Mundi Catholic Church (Soweto)
Reiger Park
Rembrandt Group
Reuven, Gauteng
Rewlatch
Reynolds View
Rhodesfield
Rhodesfield (Gautrain station)
Richard Clark (director)
Ridgeway, Johannesburg
Riepen Park
Rietvallei, Gauteng
Riovic
Risana
Rising Star Cave
Rising Star Expedition
Rispark
Rissik Street Post Office
River Club, Gauteng
Riverbend, Gauteng
Riviera, Gauteng
Rivonia
Rivonia Square
Robert Gordon (screenwriter)
Robertsham
RoboCop (1987 film)
Rock FM 91.9
Rocky
Rodney Rothman
Roedean School (South Africa)
Roger Ebert
Rogue One
Roman's Pizza
Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Johannesburg
Roodepoort
Roodepoort Commando
Rooikat
Roseacre, Gauteng
Rosebank, Gauteng
Rosebank (Gautrain station)
Rosettenville
Rossair Executive Air Charter
Rossmore, Johannesburg
Rotten Tomatoes
Rouxville, Johannesburg
Rovos Air
Royal Johannesburg & Kensington Golf Club
Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise
Ruimsig Stadium
Ruiterhof
S2CID (identifier)
SABC
SABC 1
SABC 2
SABC 3
SABC Children
SABC Education
SABC News
SABC Sport
SAB World of Beer
SASBO – The Finance Union
SA Army Troop Information Unit
SA Flyer
SA Waste Holdings
SAfm
SSSS.Gridman
STANLIB
Sacred Heart College, Johannesburg
Safair
Salfred
Salisbury Claims
Salon.com
Salon (website)
San Diego Comic-Con
San Diego Comic-Con International
San Diego Comic Con
Sandfontein Artillery Regiment
Sandhurst, Gauteng
Sandown, Gauteng
Sandown High School, Johannesburg
Sandringham High School, Johannesburg
Sandton
Sandton (Gautrain station)
Sandton City
Sandton Commando
Sappi
Sarafina! (film)
Sasfin Bank
Sasol
Saturn Award for Best International Film
Satyagraha House
Savoy Estate
Saxonwold
Scanners
Schlesinger Building
Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America
Science fiction action film
Scottish Horse War Memorial
Second Boer War
Secretariat of the Pan-African Parliament
Section 9
Seiun Award
Sekhukhune Anti-Aircraft Regiment
Selby, Johannesburg
Sentech
Serenity (2005 film)
Seven (1995 film)
Sexually transmitted disease
Shaolin Soccer
Sharlto Copley
Shell House (Johannesburg)
Shell House massacre
Shin Godzilla
Shlom Native Eating House
Shooting of Nathaniel Julies
Short film
Shrine of Our Lady of the Cedars
Shuttlecraft
Sibanye-Stillwater
Simba, Gauteng
Simba (South African company)
Simmer and Jack
Sinaba Stadium
Sir John Adamson High School
Sivuyile Ngodwana
SkyReach Aircraft
Skywise (airline)
Sleeper (1973 film)
Sling Aircraft
Smear campaign
Sober & Lonely Institute for Contemporary Art
Social segregation
Socialist Party of Azania
Socialist Revolutionary Workers Party (South Africa)
Solaris (1972 film)
Solenta Aviation
Solomon Mahlangu Regiment
Solridge
Sony Computer Entertainment
Sony Pictures
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment
Sony Pictures Releasing
Sophiatown
South Africa
South Africa under apartheid
South African Agricultural Plantation and Allied Workers Union
South African Air Force
South African Airways
South African Airways Museum Society
South African Army
South African Audience Research Foundation
South African Baseball Union
South African Breweries
South African Civil Aviation Authority
South African Commercial, Catering and Allied Workers Union
South African Communist Party
South African Confederation of Cue Sport
South African Council of Churches
South African Democratic Nurses' Union
South African Democratic Teachers Union
South African Derby
South African Equestrian Federation
South African Express
South African Federation of Trade Unions
South African Football Association
South African Football Players Union
South African Futures Exchange
South African Handball Federation
South African Hockey Association
South African Human Rights Commission
South African Institute for Heritage Science and Conservation
South African Institute of Chartered Accountants
South African Institute of Electrical Engineers
South African Institute of Professional Accountants
South African Institute of Race Relations
South African Lipizzaners
South African Military Health Service
South African Municipal Workers' Union
South African National Climbing Federation
South African National Editors' Forum
South African National Museum of Military History
South African National Railway And Steam Museum
South African PGA Championship
South African Police Service
South African Radio League
South African Sailing
South African Special Forces
South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee
South African State and Allied Workers' Union
South African Students Congress
South African Theological Seminary
South African Transport and Allied Workers Union
South African Union for Progressive Judaism
South African Zionist Federation
South Deep mine
South Hills, Gauteng
Southdale, Johannesburg
Southern African Music Rights Organisation
Southern African Vexillological Association
Southern Life Centre
Southern Sun Hotels
Southfork, Gauteng
Southgate, Gauteng
Southgate Shopping Centre
Soweto
Soweto Blues
Soweto Cricket Oval
Soweto Gospel Choir
Soweto Highveld Grassland
Soweto Panthers
Soweto String Quartet
Soweto TV
Soweto derby
Soweto uprising
Soylent Green
Space Battleship Yamato
Space Battleship Yamato 2199: Odyssey of the Celestial Ark
Space opera
Spartan, Kempton Park
Spatlo
Speciesism
Spes Bona
Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse
Springfield, Gauteng
Springs, South Africa
Springs Boys' High School
Springs Commando
Squash South Africa
St. Andrew's School for Girls
St. Dunstan's College (South Africa)
St. Martin's School (Rosettenville)
St. Mary's Anglican Church, Rosettenville
St. Michael and All Angels' Anglican Church, Weltevreden Park
St Aidan's Anglican Church, Johannesburg
St Augustine College of South Africa
St Barnabas College (Johannesburg)
St Benedict's College, Bedfordview
St Boniface Church, Germiston
St Catherine's School, Germiston
St David's Marist, Inanda
St Dominic's Catholic School for Girls, Boksburg
St Dunstan's Cathedral, Benoni
St John's College (Johannesburg)
St Mary's Cathedral, Johannesburg
St Mary's School, Waverley
St Peter's College, Johannesburg
St Stithians College
Stafford, Gauteng
Standard Bank
Standard Bank Building
Standard Bank Centre
Standard Chartered South Africa
Stanley R. Greenberg
StarSat
Star Wars (film)
Starship Troopers (film)
State-owned enterprises of South Africa
Statue of Mahatma Gandhi, Johannesburg
Statue of Nelson Mandela, Johannesburg
Steeledale
Steers (restaurant)
Stephen Sinclair
Ster-Kinekor
Sterkfontein
Storming of the Kempton Park World Trade Centre
Strathavon
Strijdompark
Student Sponsorship Programme South Africa
Style (magazine)
Submachine gun
Subsidized housing
Suideroord
Suikerbosrand Nature Reserve
Summer Wars
Sun International
Sunday Times (South Africa)
Sundays and Cybele
Sunningdale, Gauteng
Sunningdale Ridge
Sunninghill, Gauteng
Sunrella
Sunset Acres
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Surtees Rail Group
Swartkrans
Sybrin
Sydenham, Johannesburg
Sylvaine Strike
Taiko
Tailings
Talboton
Tambo Memorial Hospital
TauTona Mine
Taung Child
Taxi Driver
Technical (vehicle)
Teju Cole
Temple Israel (Johannesburg)
Teraco Data Environments
Terenure, Kempton Park
Terminator 2: Judgment Day
Terri Tatchell
The Adventures of Tintin (film)
The Andromeda Strain (film)
The Bassline (club)
The Beatles: Get Back
The Bridges of Madison County (film)
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
The Citizen (South African newspaper)
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Creative Counsel
The Daily Voice (South African newspaper)
The Dark Crystal
The Dark Knight
The Deer Hunter
The Doctor's Wife
The Embassy Visual Effects
The Empire Strikes Back
The Escape (2016 film)
The Frighteners
The Gables, Gauteng
The Gardens, Johannesburg
The Girl Who Leapt Through Time (2006 film)
The Glen High School
The Good Place
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Guardian
The Handmaiden
The Hill, Gauteng
The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey
The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies
The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug
The Hobbit (film series)
The Hollywood Reporter
The Independent Institute of Education
The Leonardo (Sandton)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
The Lord of the Rings (film series)
The Lovely Bones (film)
The New Age (South African newspaper)
The New York Observer
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Prisoner
The Radium Beerhall
The Real Housewives of Johannesburg
The Ridge School
The Right Stuff (film)
The Schlesinger African Air Race
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Sixth Sense
The Skin I Live In
The South African
The Sowetan
The Star (South Africa)
The Sunday Independent (South Africa)
The Terminator
The Theory of Everything (2014 film)
The Tin Drum (film)
The Untouchables (film)
The Valley (1976 film)
The Wages of Fear
The Wilds (Johannesburg)
The World (South African newspaper)
Thembisa
Theta, Gauteng
They Shall Not Grow Old
Thokoza
Thutolore Secondary School
Tiger Brands
Timber trees of Gauteng
Time (magazine)
Timeline of Johannesburg
TimesLIVE
Titanic (1997 film)
Titans (cricket team)
Tlokwe Ruins
Tokusou Sentai Dekaranger
Top 40 Music Magazine
Top Gun: Maverick
Torah Academy School, Johannesburg
Total South Africa
Towerby
Townsview
Toyota Hilux
Tractor beam
Trams in Johannesburg
Transforming Stories International Christian Film Festival
Transnet
Transport in Johannesburg
Transvaal Basin
Transvaal Memorial Hospital for Children
Transvaal Supergroup
Transvaal gold fields
Trent Opaloch
Trevor Coppola
TriStar Pictures
Tripartite Alliance
Trojan, Gauteng
Trolleybuses in Johannesburg
Troyeville
Trust Bank Building
Truvelo Armoury
Tsakane
Tsakane Clay Grassland
Tsogo Sun
Tulisa Park
Turbo Kid
Turf Club, Gauteng
Turffontein
Turffontein Racecourse
Turffontein Reformed Church
Turner Classic Movies
Tutu House
Two Women
Tygerberg building
TymeBank
UASA
UCS Building
UFO (British TV series)
UJFM
UJ Stadium
UMkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans' Association
Ubank
Uitlander
Ultra-high-definition television
Ultra HD Blu-ray
Ultra South Africa
Ultraman Tiga
Ultraman Z
Underground Astronauts
Unigray
Union Carriage & Wagon
Union Observatory
Union Stadium
Union of Orthodox Synagogues
United States
University of Hawaii
University of Johannesburg
University of Johannesburg men's basketball
University of the Witwatersrand
University of the Witwatersrand School of Architecture & Planning
University of the Witwatersrand School of Chemical and Metallurgical Engineering
University of the Witwatersrand School of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Urban forest
Urban sprawl
Urbanisation
VBS Mutual Bank
Vaal Barrage
Vaal Dam
Valley of the Stereos
Van Riebeeck Park
Vandia Grove
Variety (magazine)
Vektor CR-21
Vektor R4
Venmyn Rand
Venterspos
Victoria, Johannesburg
Victory House
Victory Park, Johannesburg
Villa Arcadia, Parktown
Villa d'Este (Johannesburg)
Village Deep, Johannesburg
Village Main, Gauteng
Viral marketing
Vision Software
Vittorio Leonardi
Vivisect
Vodacom
Voices of a Distant Star
Volleyball South Africa
Vorna Valley
Vosloorus
Vrededorp, Gauteng
Vredefort impact structure
Vusamazulu Credo Mutwa
WALL-E
Walter Sisulu National Botanical Garden
Walter Sisulu Square
WandaVision
Wanderers Stadium
Wanderers View
Wang Hui-ling
Wantitall.co.za
Waterval Estate, Randburg
Wattville
Waverley, Johannesburg
Waverley Girls' High School
Wayback Machine
WeBuyCars Dome
Web feed
Webber Wentzel
Weighted arithmetic mean
Weighted average
Welcome to Our Hillbrow
Weltevredenpark
Welverdiend, Gauteng
Wemmer
Wemmer Pan
Wemmerpan Commando
Werksmans
WesBank Raceway
West Driefontein
West Park Commando
West Rand
West Rand Commando
West Rand District Municipality
West Wits mine
West of Memphis
Westbury, Johannesburg
Westbury Secondary School
Westcliff, Gauteng
Westdene, Johannesburg
Westdene dam disaster
Westonaria
Westpark Cemetery
Weta Digital
Weta Workshop
Whenever You're Ready (The Good Place)
White savior narrative in film
Widescreen
Wierda Valley
Wilge River (Olifants)
Willaway
William Allen Young
Willowild
Willowmoore Park
Wimpy (restaurant)
Winchester Hills
WingNut Films
Wings of Desire
Witkoppen
Witness (1985 film)
Witpoort
Wits Theatre Complex
Wits University F.C.
Wits Vuvuzela
Witwatersrand
Witwatersrand Basin
Witwatersrand Command
Witwatersrand Gold Rush
Witwatersrand Native Labour Association
Witwatersrand Supergroup
Wizzit
Woman Against Rape
Wonder Cave (Kromdraai, Gauteng)
Wonderfonteinspruit
Woodlands, Johannesburg
Woodmead
Woody Allen
Workers' Library and Museum
Workers and Socialist Party
World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions
Wynberg, Gauteng
Wētā FX
Wētā Workshop
Xenophobia
YFM
Yebo Yes United F.C.
Yellow (2006 short film)
Yeoville
Yeoville Water Tower
Yeshiva College of South Africa
Yeshiva Maharsha Beis Aharon
Yeshivah Gedolah of Johannesburg
Young Frankenstein
Yuri Rasovsky
Zabalaza Anarchist Communist Front
Zandspruit
Zeiram
Zoic Studios
Zola, South Africa
Zondo Commission
Zoo City
Zoo Lake
Zuurbekom
http://www.district9movie.com/
http://blog.us.playstation.com/2009/10/district-9-forged-together-with-god-of-war-iii/
http://scifiwire.com/2009/07/district-9-director-alrea.php
http://uk.rottentomatoes.com/m/district_9/news/1842105/neill_blomkamp_talks_district_9_rt_interview
http://www.oneguysopinion.com/InterviewsResults.php?ID=451
http://io9.com/5341120/5-things-you-didnt-know-about-district-9
http://www.vfxworld.com/?atype=articles&id=4032
http://www.theweek.co.uk/politics/20029/district-9-one-long-sales-pitch-south-africa%E2%80%99s-arms-industry
http://www.imcdb.org/movie.php?id=1136608
http://www.definitionmagazine.com/journal/2009/11/1/attack-of-the-terabytes.html
http://www.mxfx.co.za/features.html
http://www.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,1916009,00.html
http://www.guardianweekly.co.uk/?page=editorial&id=1237&catID=9
http://www.mg.co.za/article/2009-08-28-loving-the-aliens
http://antieviction.org.za/2009/10/05/un-affiliated-ngo-asks-the-city-to-reconsider-symphony-ways-eviction-to-blikkiesdorp-which-will-be-decided-in-court-on-wednesday/
http://www.jsonline.com/entertainment/movies/53074407.html
http://www.sacsis.org.za/site/article/352.1
http://www.sacsis.org.za/site/article/343.1
http://scorenotes.com/interviews.html
http://www.firstshowing.net/2009/08/14/for-humans-only-a-look-back-at-district-9s-success-story/
http://d-9.com/
http://www.multinationalunited.com/
http://www.mnuspreadslies.com/
http://mathsfromouterspace.com/
http://www.firstshowing.net/2008/07/30/next-big-viral-neill-blomkamps-district-9-for-humans-only/
http://www.metacritic.com/film/titles/district9/
http://movies.ign.com/articles/677/677739p1.html
http://www.observer.com/2009/movies/district-9-blew-my-mind
http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/n/a/2009/08/12/entertainment/e082032D23.DTL
http://www.vanguardngr.com/2009/09/25/govt-bans-showing-of-district-9-film-in-nigeria/
http://www.sfawardswatch.com/?p=3274
http://carpetbagger.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/02/02/oscar-nominations/
http://www.digital.cinefex.com/nxtbooks/cinefex/119/index.php?startid=31
http://www.swissinfo.ch/eng/news_digest/Locarno_Film_Festival_presents_leaner_bill.html?cid=995986
http://movies.msn.com/oscars/geek-oscars/?icid=MOVIES1&GT1=MOVIES1&mpc=2
http://www.highveld.co.za/thelounge/gallery/event.asp?id=565
http://www.giantfreakinrobot.com/scifi/neill-blomkamp-talks-district-9-sequel-star-wars.html
http://www.knphotographics.com/wp-kaleo/2009/08/26/features/district-9-reveals-human-inhumanity.html
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8264180.stm
https://viaf.org/viaf/225072768
http://www.hdvideopro.com/film-and-tv/feature-films/i-robot/page-4
http://www.humanehollywood.org/index.php/end-credits/unauthorized-end-credits
https://web.archive.org/web/20090817014336/http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/n/a/2009/08/12/entertainment/e082032D23.DTL
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/02/district-9-labelled-xenophobic-nigerians
https://www.idref.fr/179373552
https://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/06/movies/06district.html
https://www.wired.com/underwire/2009/08/xenophobia-racism-drive-alien-relocation-in-district-9/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090914050308/http://www.oneguysopinion.com/InterviewsResults.php?ID=451
https://web.archive.org/web/20091121091511/http://antieviction.org.za/2009/10/05/un-affiliated-ngo-asks-the-city-to-reconsider-symphony-ways-eviction-to-blikkiesdorp-which-will-be-decided-in-court-on-wednesday/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150713044920/http://www.hdvideopro.com/film-and-tv/feature-films/i-robot/page-4
https://web.archive.org/web/20090909061811/http://scorenotes.com/interviews.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20090919033742/http://scifiwire.com/2009/07/district-9-director-alrea.php
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v423766
https://d-nb.info/gnd/7842330-2
https://web.archive.org/web/20090830194354/http://www.highveld.co.za/thelounge/gallery/event.asp?id=565
https://web.archive.org/web/20090906121331/http://uk.rottentomatoes.com/m/district_9/news/1842105/neill_blomkamp_talks_district_9_rt_interview
https://web.archive.org/web/20100206011036/http://carpetbagger.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/02/02/oscar-nominations/
https://web.archive.org/web/20141129033624/http://io9.com/5341120/5-things-you-didnt-know-about-district-9
https://web.archive.org/web/20090816090634/http://www.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,1916009,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20071118165406/http://www.guardianweekly.co.uk/?page=editorial
https://web.archive.org/web/20090830174836/http://www.mg.co.za/article/2009-08-28-loving-the-aliens
https://web.archive.org/web/20111224174605/http://movies.msn.com/oscars/geek-oscars/?icid=MOVIES1&GT1=MOVIES1&mpc=2
https://web.archive.org/web/20090830210737/http://www.wired.com/underwire/2009/08/xenophobia-racism-drive-alien-relocation-in-district-9/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100723064150/http://www.jsonline.com/entertainment/movies/53074407.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20090922201454/http://www.sacsis.org.za/site/article/352.1
https://web.archive.org/web/20090922222034/http://www.sacsis.org.za/site/article/343.1
https://web.archive.org/web/20090820182016/http://vfxworld.com/?atype=articles&id=4032
https://web.archive.org/web/20120425071554/http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/06/movies/06district.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20141202013821/http://www.theweek.co.uk/politics/20029/district-9-one-long-sales-pitch-south-africa%E2%80%99s-arms-industry
https://web.archive.org/web/20130619165745/http://www.imcdb.org/movie.php?id=1136608
https://web.archive.org/web/20110709011335/http://www.definitionmagazine.com/journal/2009/11/1/attack-of-the-terabytes.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20090821083921/http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118007279.html?categoryid=13&cs=1&nid=2564
https://web.archive.org/web/20130929072436/http://www.digital.cinefex.com/nxtbooks/cinefex/119/index.php?startid=31
https://web.archive.org/web/20120301113540/http://www.mxfx.co.za/features.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20090818223908/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=2610&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20090819135155/http://www.firstshowing.net/2009/08/14/for-humans-only-a-look-back-at-district-9s-success-story/
https://web.archive.org/web/20161031085139/http://articles.latimes.com/2009/jun/19/entertainment/et-district19
https://web.archive.org/web/20090725090044/http://www.d-9.com//
https://web.archive.org/web/20090907074518/http://www.multinationalunited.com/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090908212831/http://www.mnuspreadslies.com/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090907235434/http://www.mathsfromouterspace.com/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090903185009/http://www.firstshowing.net/2008/07/30/next-big-viral-neill-blomkamps-district-9-for-humans-only/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090705124146/http://www.comingsoon.net/news/movienews.php?id=56856
https://web.archive.org/web/20100727190611/http://www.dreadcentral.com/news/38455/wetas-first-district-9-figure-revealed-christopher-johnson-and-son
https://web.archive.org/web/20151115120818/http://www.humanehollywood.org/index.php/end-credits/unauthorized-end-credits
https://web.archive.org/web/20090821031343/http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118007321.html?categoryid=1082&cs=1
https://web.archive.org/web/20090830013744/http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118007604.html?categoryid=1082&cs=1
https://web.archive.org/web/20120225015510/http://www.swissinfo.ch/eng/news_digest/Locarno_Film_Festival_presents_leaner_bill.html?cid=995986
https://web.archive.org/web/20090804080946/http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/district_9/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090821095359/http://www.metacritic.com/film/titles/district9/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090815143806/http://www.observer.com/2009/movies/district-9-blew-my-mind
https://web.archive.org/web/20090815201404/http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20297361,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20090815001037/http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20090812/REVIEWS/908129987
https://web.archive.org/web/20100528151941/http://www.cinemablend.com/new/Too-Close-To-Call-10-Ways-District-9-Is-An-Alien-Nation-Knockoff-14310.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20101204000706/http://movies.ign.com/articles/677/677739p1.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20091001070536/http://www.vanguardngr.com/2009/09/25/govt-bans-showing-of-district-9-film-in-nigeria/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130907121910/http://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/02/district-9-labelled-xenophobic-nigerians
https://web.archive.org/web/20100525110902/http://www.sfawardswatch.com/?p=3274
https://web.archive.org/web/20110405081545/http://www.dreadcentral.com/news/34090/district-9-blu-ray-and-dvd-art-hovers-over-us
https://web.archive.org/web/20121019021102/http://www.dreadcentral.com/news/34281/district-9-blu-ray-include-god-war-iii-demo
https://web.archive.org/web/20121019094245/http://www.empireonline.com/news/feed.asp?NID=26657
https://web.archive.org/web/20120517132858/http://www.empireonline.com/news/story.asp?NID=27715
https://web.archive.org/web/20130616101247/http://www.giantfreakinrobot.com/scifi/neill-blomkamp-talks-district-9-sequel-star-wars.html
https://books.google.com/books?id=Gua2CgAAQBAJ
https://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/peter-jackson-9781623569488/
http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/sdut-af-nigeria-district-9-091909-2009sep19-story.html
https://variety.com/2007/film/markets-festivals/peter-jackson-gears-up-for-district-2-1117975244/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt1136608/
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=district9.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/district_9
https://waypoint.vice.com/en_us/article/xwqjg3/the-complete-untold-history-of-halo-an-oral-history
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/district-9
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX5002174
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb170607756
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb170607756
https://www.variety.com/article/VR1117975365.html
https://www.variety.com/article/VR1118007288.html
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=2610&p=.htm
https://articles.latimes.com/2009/jun/19/entertainment/et-district19
https://www.comingsoon.net/news/movienews.php?id=56856
https://www.dreadcentral.com/news/38455/wetas-first-district-9-figure-revealed-christopher-johnson-and-son
https://www.variety.com/article/VR1118007321.html?categoryid=1082&cs=1
https://www.variety.com/article/VR1118007604.html?categoryid=1082&cs=1
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/district_9/
https://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20297361,00.html
https://www.cinemablend.com/new/Too-Close-To-Call-10-Ways-District-9-Is-An-Alien-Nation-Knockoff-14310.html
https://www.dreadcentral.com/news/34090/district-9-blu-ray-and-dvd-art-hovers-over-us
https://www.dreadcentral.com/news/34281/district-9-blu-ray-include-god-war-iii-demo
https://www.empireonline.com/news/feed.asp?NID=26657
https://www.empireonline.com/news/story.asp?NID=27715
https://ultrahd.highdefdigest.com/85984/district94kultrahdbluray.html
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q201819#identifiers
https://books.google.com/books?id=JwiKQgAACAAJ
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/736906/enwp
https://twitter.com/NeillBlomkamp/status/1365167374421225473
https://web.archive.org/web/20200306005355/http://www.knphotographics.com/wp-kaleo/2009/08/26/features/district-9-reveals-human-inhumanity.html
http://features.cgsociety.org/story_custom.php?story_id=5231
https://books.google.com/books?id=rsEtDwAAQBAJ&q=district+9&pg=PT10
https://www.cinemascore.com/
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-news/6133598/District-9-the-most-disgusting-aliens-in-film.html
https://scifibulletin.com/us-tv/the-expanse-interview-composer-clinton-shorter/
http://www.filmmusicmag.com/?p=3804
https://web.archive.org/web/20150716064211/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=district9.htm
https://bbfc.co.uk/releases/district-9-2009-0
https://web.archive.org/web/20150402170539/http://bbfc.co.uk/releases/district-9-2009-0
https://archive.today/20150412150618/http://africasacountry.com/comment-district-9-and-the-nigerians/
http://africasacountry.com/comment-district-9-and-the-nigerians/
http://www.salon.com/2013/02/21/oscar_loves_a_white_savior/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140410110258/http://www.salon.com/2013/02/21/oscar_loves_a_white_savior/
https://www.challengingborders.com/there-is-no-need-for-a-white-savior-in-district-9/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q201819#P1712
https://variety.com/2009/film/news/interview-neill-blomkamp-1118007279/
https://web.archive.org/web/20121015043809/http://blog.us.playstation.com/2009/10/28/district-9-forged-together-with-god-of-war-iii/
https://www.goldenglobes.com/film/district-9
https://web.archive.org/web/20180218210844/https://qmplus.qmul.ac.uk/pluginfile.php/661999/mod_resource/content/1/Chaudhuri,%20Uninvited%20visitors.pdf
https://qmplus.qmul.ac.uk/pluginfile.php/661999/mod_resource/content/1/Chaudhuri,%20Uninvited%20visitors.pdf
https://movieweb.com/district-10-gets-another-promising-update-from-sharlto-copley
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/760792
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/686934
https://web.archive.org/web/20201205114059/https://scifibulletin.com/us-tv/the-expanse-interview-composer-clinton-shorter/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190426115321/http://www.filmmusicmag.com/%3Fp=3804/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180315011247/https://waypoint.vice.com/en_us/article/xwqjg3/the-complete-untold-history-of-halo-an-oral-history
https://web.archive.org/web/20180214073338/http://variety.com/2007/film/markets-festivals/peter-jackson-gears-up-for-district-2-1117975244/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230121031749/https://books.google.com/books?id=Gua2CgAAQBAJ
https://web.archive.org/web/20210916120226/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-news/6133598/District-9-the-most-disgusting-aliens-in-film.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220524124119/https://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/peter-jackson-9781623569488/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100111144736/http://features.cgsociety.org/story_custom.php?story_id=5231
https://web.archive.org/web/20230121031749/https://books.google.com/books?id=rsEtDwAAQBAJ&q=district+9&pg=PT10
https://web.archive.org/web/20230121031749/https://books.google.com/books?id=JwiKQgAACAAJ
https://web.archive.org/web/20180102130540/https://www.cinemascore.com/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180220033253/http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/sdut-af-nigeria-district-9-091909-2009sep19-story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20150514172228/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8264180.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20180218213456/https://www.challengingborders.com/there-is-no-need-for-a-white-savior-in-district-9/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220713202353/https://www.goldenglobes.com/film/district-9
https://web.archive.org/web/20200727160333/https://ultrahd.highdefdigest.com/85984/district94kultrahdbluray.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20210226051053/https://twitter.com/NeillBlomkamp/status/1365167374421225473
https://web.archive.org/web/20221114145254/https://movieweb.com/district-10-gets-another-promising-update-from-sharlto-copley/
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/district-9-2009
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/n2016056480
http://explore.bfi.org.uk/4ce2b8d56672d
https://web.archive.org/web/20140714140106/http://explore.bfi.org.uk/4ce2b8d56672d
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-features/gran-turismo-movie-neill-blomkamp-1235575045/
https://doi.org/10.3828%2Fsfftv.2020.11
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:225568302
https://doi.org/10.3828%2Fsfftv.2018.7
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:193984726
https://scifiscoop.com/district-9-premieres-at-comic-con-to-rave-reviews/
https://www.slashfilm.com/504688/comic-con-video-blog-district-9-review/
https://www.gamesradar.com/comic-con-09-first-reaction-district-9/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yXZg9tbyZ4c
