Flirtation Walk
Flirtation Walk is a 1934 American romantic musical film written by Delmer Daves and Lou Edelman, and directed by Frank Borzage. It focuses on a soldier (Dick Powell) who falls in love with a general's daughter (Ruby Keeler) during the general's brief stop in Hawaii but is bereft when she leaves with her father for the Philippines before their relationship can blossom. They are re-united several years later when the soldier is about to graduate from West Point and the general becomes the Academy's Commandant.
The film's title refers to a path near Trophy Point named "Flirtation Walk", where cadets often take dance dates for some time alone.


== Plot ==
Richard Palmer Grant Dorcy Jr., also known as "the Canary" and "the singing bird of the tropics," is an enlisted man in the United States Army. Stationed in the Hawaiian Islands, he has a contentious but friendly relationship with his sergeant, Scrapper Thornhill. When General Fitts visits the post with his daughter Kit on their way to Manila, Dick is assigned to drive her to a reception that evening. Falling victim to the moonlit night, Kit and Dick attend a luau instead, and he sings Aloha ‘Oe. They are discovered in each other's arms by Scrapper and Lieutenant Biddle, who is also in love with Kit. Biddle accuses Dick of ruining Kit's reputation and forcing her to accompany him off post. Dick decides to desert. Scrapper begs Kit to straighten things out with Biddle.
To prevent Dick from deserting, Kit tells him that she was responding to a crazy impulse and he means nothing to her. Stung by her words, and Biddle's condescending statement that "if you were an officer and a gentleman, you'd understand," Dick decides to compete with Biddle as an equal and applies for West Point. He is accepted and does very well, to Scrapper's delight. In his First Class year, Dick becomes First Captain and General Fitts is appointed Academy superintendent, with Biddle present as his aide. While most of his classmates are infatuated with Kit, Dick is cold to her. Consequently, he is not very happy when the rest of the men insist that she participate in the traditional "Hundredth Night" theatrical performance that he is to direct.
Dick writes a comedy about a female general with a message directed at Kit. After the first rehearsal, Kit walks with Dick on Flirtation Walk and tries to explain why she told him she was not in love with him. Dick is too angry to listen to Kit, but during their on-stage love scene kisses her, and she admits she loves him. When, near graduation, General Fitts announces Kit's engagement to Biddle, Dick naturally is confused, and visits her after lights out to talk her out of marrying Biddle. He is caught by Biddle and, at Biddle's suggestion, agrees to resign from the Academy to protect Kit's name. Scrapper arrives at the Academy to see Dick graduate and is disappointed to learn of his resignation. The day is saved when Biddle tells Dick that his resignation was not accepted and that Kit returned his ring, wishing him good luck. Dick graduates a happy man.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
The review of the film in The New York Times reported that many scenes were actually shot at West Point, and The Hollywood Reporter reported that Bobby Connolly began to film the Hawaiian number on July 3, 1934, and was scheduled to finish on July 10.  The set was the largest one ever built at Warner Bros. Following completion of that number, Connolly started the military wedding number using over 400 dancers. The success of the film led Warner Brothers to combine Powell, Keeler, Alexander, and Arledge again with Borzage and Daves under similar circumstances of plot and character to make Shipmates Forever, a film about the United States Naval Academy, the following year.


== Box office ==
According to Warner Bros records the film earned $1,062,000 domestically and $471,000 internationally.


== Awards and honors ==
The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture and Best Sound Recording (Nathan Levinson).


== Songs ==
Aloha 'Oe (1878) by Princess Liliʻuokalani
Music and Lyrics by Allie Wrubel and Mort Dixon

"Flirtation Walk"
"I See Two Lovers"
"Mr. and Mrs. Is the Name"
"When Do We Eat?"
"Smoking in the Dark"
"No Horse, No Wife, No Mustache"


== References ==


== External links ==
Flirtation Walk at the American Film Institute Catalog
Flirtation Walk at IMDb 
Flirtation Walk at AllMovie
Flirtation Walk at the TCM Movie Database
Flirtation Walk at Rotten Tomatoes
Flirtation Walk profile, san.beck.org7th Heaven (1927 film)
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Farewell to Arms (1932 film)
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound
After Tomorrow
AllMovie
Allie Wrubel
Aloha ʻOe
Army Black Knights baseball
Army Black Knights football
Army Black Knights men's basketball
Army Black Knights men's ice hockey
Army Black Knights men's lacrosse
Army Black Knights men's soccer
Army Black Knights softball
Army Black Knights women's basketball
Army Mules
Army Rugby Football Club
Army West Point Black Knights
Army–Navy Cup
Army–Navy Game
Army–Navy lacrosse rivalry
Arvin Gymnasium
Bad Girl (1931 film)
Big City (1937 film)
Billy Jim
Bobby Connolly
Cadet Honor Code
Chapel of the Most Holy Trinity (West Point)
Children of Dust
China Doll (film)
Christl Arena
Combating Terrorism Center
Commander-in-Chief's Trophy
Constitution Island
Daddy's Gone A-Hunting (1925 film)
Delmer Daves
Department of Physical Education
Desertion
Desire (1936 film)
Dick Powell
Disputed Passage
Doctors' Wives (1931 film)
Early to Wed
Eggnog riot
Flight Command
Flirtation Walk (West Point)
Flying Colors (1917 film)
Fort Clinton (West Point)
Fort Putnam
Frank Borzage
Frederick Burton (actor)
George Barnes (cinematographer)
Get-Rich-Quick Wallingford (1921 film)
Gillis Field House
Green Light (1937 film)
Guinn Williams (actor)
Hawaii
Hayes Gymnasium
Hearts Divided
Henry O'Neill
His Butler's Sister
History Is Made at Night (1937 film)
History of the United States Military Academy
Hudson River Chain
Humoresque (1920 film)
I've Always Loved You
IMDb (identifier)
Indoor Obstacle Course Test
John Arledge
John Darrow
John Eldredge (actor)
Johnson Stadium at Doubleday Field
Journey Beneath the Desert
Kosciuszko's Garden
Lazybones (1925 film)
Liliom (1930 film)
Liliuokalani
List of United States Military Academy alumni
List of United States Military Academy non-graduate alumni
List of United States Military Academy top-ranking graduates
List of monuments at the United States Military Academy
Little Man, What Now? (1934 film)
Living on Velvet
Luau
Lucky Star (1929 film)
Lusk Reservoir
Magnificent Doll
Man's Castle
Manila
Mannequin (1937 film)
Marriage License?
Master of the Sword
Michie Stadium
Moonrise (film)
Mort Dixon
Nathan Levinson
No Greater Glory
Old Cadet Chapel (West Point)
On, Brave Old Army Team
Pat O'Brien (actor)
Philippines
Prudence on Broadway
Redoubt Four (West Point)
Robert Lord (screenwriter)
Romantic musical film
Ross Alexander
Rotten Tomatoes
Ruby Keeler
Sandhurst Competition
Secrets (1924 film)
Secrets (1933 film)
Shipmates Forever
Smilin' Through (1941 film)
Society for Sale
Sol Polito
Song o' My Heart
Stage Door Canteen (film)
Steven W. Gilland
Stranded (1935 film)
Strange Cargo (1940 film)
Street Angel (1928 film)
Superintendent of the United States Military Academy
Sylvanus Thayer
Sylvanus Thayer Award
Tate Rink
Territory of Hawaii
That's My Man
That Gal of Burke's
Thayer Hotel
The Age of Desire
The Big Fisherman
The Circle (1925 film)
The Corps (song)
The Dixie Merchant
The Duke of Chimney Butte
The Hollywood Reporter
The Lady (1925 film)
The Mortal Storm
The New York Times
The Plain (West Point)
The Pride of Palomar
The River (1929 film)
The Shining Hour
The Spanish Main
The Vanishing Virginian
The class the stars fell on
They Had to See Paris
Three Comrades (1938 film)
Till We Meet Again (1944 film)
Trophy Point
Turner Classic Movies
United States Army
United States Military Academy
United States Military Academy class ring
United States Military Academy grounds and facilities
United States Naval Academy
Warner Bros.
West Point
West Point Cadet Chapel
West Point Cemetery
West Point Jewish Chapel
West Point Light (New York)
West Point Team Handball
William Holmes (film editor)
Young America (1932 film)
Young as You Feel (1931 film)
http://www.san.beck.org/MM/1934/FlirtationWalk.html
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1935
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v17860
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0025124/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/6594
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/flirtation_walk
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/883/enwp
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q949642#P345
