Four Daughters
Four Daughters is a 1938 American romance film that tells the story of a happy musical family whose lives and loves are disrupted by the arrival of a charming young composer who interjects himself into the daughters' romantic lives. His cynical, bitter musician friend comes to help orchestrate his latest composition and complicates matters even more. The movie stars the Lane Sisters (Priscilla Lane, Rosemary Lane, and Lola Lane) and Gale Page, and features Claude Rains, Jeffrey Lynn, John Garfield, and Dick Foran.  The three Lanes were sisters and members of a family singing trio.
The film was written by Lenore J. Coffee and Julius J. Epstein, adapted from the 1937 Fannie Hurst story "Sister Act", and was directed by Michael Curtiz. The movie's success led to two sequels with more or less the same cast: Four Wives and Four Mothers. The same cast—with the addition of Fay Bainter and Donald Crisp—appeared in the film Daughters Courageous, which had no connection with the Lemp family trilogy.


== Plot ==
The Lemp sisters, Emma (Gale Page), Thea (Lola Lane), Kay (Rosemary Lane), and Ann (Priscilla Lane) are accomplished musicians in a musical family headed by their widowed father, Adam (Claude Rains), who plays the flute. Harpist Emma, the oldest daughter, is the object of a neighbor's affection, but she rebuffs Ernest's (Dick Foran) attentions. Thea, a pianist and the second eldest, is courted by wealthy Ben Crowley (Frank McHugh), another neighbor, but she is not sure she loves him. Kay, the third daughter, is a talented singer and has a chance at a music school scholarship but doesn't want to leave home. The youngest daughter is Ann, a violinist.
One day, Ann's violin practice is interrupted by the sound of their front gate squeaking. She instructs the young man making free with it in the finer points of the art, and introduces him to an apparently disapproving passerby, Mrs. Ridgefield, a local gossip. This charmer is young composer Felix Deitz (Jeffrey Lynn), come to work at the foundation where Adam is Dean. He has a letter of introduction to Adam, and while they talk, the girls set the dinner table with the very best silver. All four daughters are attracted to Felix, and they soon invite him to room with the family. He also charms Aunt Etta. Felix hopes to win a prize with his latest composition. Enter Felix's friend Mickey (John Garfield), a cynical orchestral arranger whose hard life has given him a grim view of existence. He falls for Ann, and is crushed when she announces at Adam's birthday party that she and Felix are engaged.
An hour before Ann and Felix are to marry, Mickey tells Ann how he feels—and that Emma is “insane” about Felix. Through a window, Ann observes Emma's distress when she ties Felix's tie before the ceremony. Everyone is wondering where Ann is when a telegram arrives, addressed to Emma, telling them she has eloped with Mickey. Ernest calmly steps in to tell the guests.
Four months later, Ann and Mickey are living a hard life in New York City, professing love for each other but poor and unhappy. Mickey is invited to form a band and go to South America with some fellow musicians, but cannot afford passage. Ann forbids him to ask Ben for the money and asks Mickey if he would go if she weren't hung around his neck.
The family meets at the Lemps' house for Christmas, except Kay, who is singing on the radio that night. Emma did not get together with Felix; she is now engaged to Ernest. Felix is alone and unhappy, though the composition Mickey helped to orchestrate won a prize: a contract with the Seattle Symphony Orchestra. He is to leave that very night. While Kay sings Mendelssohn's  “On Wings of Song,” the camera passes over the listening family, revealing much. Ann, moved to tears, takes out her handkerchief and drops two pawn tickets. Felix sees them—one is for a bracelet he'd given her earlier in the year.
Mickey drives Felix to the train station in Ben's car, dropping Ben at the drugstore. He apologizes to Felix, who says it is all in the past. Felix offers Mickey a loan, but Mickey refuses, musing that he must be a new man; the old Mickey would have taken it.  As the train pulls out, Felix presses an envelope into his hands and tells him to use it for Ann, “any way you think that will make her happy.” Mickey watches the train leave and is suddenly grim. He gets into the car and drives away. It begins to snow. He turns off the windshield wiper and presses the accelerator to the floor.
In the kitchen, doing dishes, Emma tells Ann that she had thought she was in love with Felix and would have kept on thinking so and spoiled her life if Ann had married him, but she was awakened to Ernest's qualities when he took charge at the wedding. Ann bursts into tears—and Thea screams. Ben is in the hospital.
Adam emerges from the hospital room to tell them that it isn't Ben, it's Mickey. He dies with Ann at his bedside.
It is spring; the trees in the yard are heavy with blossom. The girls and Adam are playing the piece that opened the film. Ann hears the sound of the gate squeaking. It is Felix. The family watches from the house as she welcomes him home and they swing together—until Mrs. Ridgefield approaches. “This is where we came in,” Felix cries, and they run inside. Mrs. Ridgefield looks around and steps onto the gate. The camera pulls slowly back as she swings back and forth, a blissful smile on her face.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Contemporary sources report that Errol Flynn was originally cast as Felix, but dropped out because of illness. According to TCM, Flynn was actually unhappy with the size of the part. Modern sources indicate that Michael Curtiz wanted Burgess Meredith to play Mickey, but he was unavailable. Garfield modeled his performance on troubled pianist Oscar Levant. Garfield's characterization of Mickey in this, his first major film role, defined his screen personality for many future roles.The classical music that plays a key part in the film is not identified and the composers are not credited on screen. The only onscreen credit is “Music by Max Steiner”. Records credit Franz Schubert and his Serenade, which opens the film and is played again near the end. According to TCM.com, Harry Warren, Al Dubin, Allie Wrubel, Elliot Grennard, Hugo Friedhofer, Heinz Roemheld and Bernard Kaun contributed to the music. Max Rabinowitz composed "Mickey's Theme," and also played the piano off-screen during Garfield's performance. Ray Heindorf handled the orchestration.


== Reception ==
The New York Times movie review said: "A charming, at times heartbreakingly human, little comedy about life in a musical family of attractive daughters which occasionally is ruffled by the drama of a masculine world outside, Four Daughters, at the Music Hall, tempts one to agree with Jack Warner's recent assertion in the advertisements that it is the climax of his career. Putting aside Mr. Warner's career for the nonce, we may assert with equal confidence that Four Daughters is one of the best pictures of anybody's career, if only for the sake of the marvelously meaningful character of Mickey Borden as portrayed by John (formerly Jules) Garfield, who bites off his lines with a delivery so eloquent that we still aren't sure whether it is the dialogue or Mr. Garfield who is so bitterly brilliant."The New York Times named it one of the year's ten best films. The National Board of Review named Garfield as one of the year's best actors.The film has a 100% fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 10 reviews.


== Accolades ==


=== Academy Awards ===
NominationsOutstanding Production: Warner Bros.-First National
Best Directing: Michael Curtiz
Best Sound Recording: Warner Bros. Studio Sound Department, Nathan Levinson, Sound Director
Best Actor in a Supporting Role: John Garfield
Best Writing (Screenplay): Julius J. Epstein, Lenore Coffee


=== Others ===
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:

2002: AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions – Nominated


== Film series and remake ==
Four Daughters is the first in a series of four films by Warner Bros. featuring the Lane Sisters and the other cast members. It was followed by 1939's Daughters Courageous, also directed by Michael Curtiz and co-starring Claude Rains and John Garfield, though it is a story about a different family. However, the storyline of Four Daughters and the Lemp family is continued in the 1940 film, Four Wives, and 1941's Four Mothers.
Four Daughters was remade in 1954 as Young at Heart, starring Frank Sinatra in the role played by Garfield and Doris Day in Priscilla Lane's part. All the characters' names were changed, the number of daughters was reduced to three, and the young men who vie for the heroine's heart compose songs rather than orchestral music. Young at Heart also has a very different ending: Frank Sinatra's character's suicide attempt fails.


== Home media ==
Warner Archive released Four Daughters on DVD on August 4, 2009. The film was also released by Warner Archive in the "Four Daughters Movie Series Collection" on August 1, 2011.


== References ==


== External links ==

Four Daughters at the American Film Institute Catalog
Four Daughters at IMDb
Four Daughters at AllMovie
Four Daughters at the TCM Movie Database
Four Daughters at Rotten Tomatoes11th Academy Awards
20,000 Years in Sing Sing
99-es számú bérkocsi
AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Breath of Scandal
A Deadly Game (1924 film)
A Million Bid (1927 film)
A Penny's History
A Soldier's Plaything
A skorpió I.
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay)
Alias the Doctor
AllMovie
Allie Wrubel
Alraune (1918 film)
American Film Institute
Angels with Dirty Faces
Avalanche (1923 film)
Bernhard Kaun
Black Fury (film)
Boccaccio (1920 film)
Bright Leaf
Bright Lights (1930 film)
Bright Lights (1935 film)
British Agent
Burgess Meredith
Bánk Bán (film)
Cab No. 13
Captain Blood (1935 film)
Captains of the Clouds
Captive Souls
Casablanca (film)
Classical music
Claude Rains
Das Spielzeug von Paris
Daughters Courageous
Demon of the Sea
Dick Foran
Dive Bomber (film)
Doctor X (film)
Dodge City (film)
Donald Crisp
Doris Day
Earth's Man
Ernest Haller
Errol Flynn
Fannie Hurst
Fay Bainter
Female (1933 film)
Film series
First National Pictures
Flamingo Road (film)
Force of Arms
Four's a Crowd
Four Daughters (2023 film)
Four Mothers
Four Wives
Francis of Assisi (film)
Frank McHugh
Frank Sinatra
Franz Schubert
Front Page Woman
Gale Page
General Babka (1924 film)
Glad Rag Doll (film)
God's Gift to Women
Gold Is Where You Find It
Golddigger (film)
Good Time Charley
Good and Evil (film)
Goodbye Again (1933 film)
Hal B. Wallis
Harry Warren
Harun al Raschid (film)
Hearts in Exile (1929 film)
Heinz Roemheld
Hugo Friedhofer
I'll See You in My Dreams (1951 film)
IMDb (identifier)
Janie (1944 film)
Jean the Tenant
Jeffrey Lynn
Jim Thorpe – All-American
Jimmy the Gent (film)
John Garfield
Julius J. Epstein
Jön az öcsém
Júdás
Kid Galahad (1937 film)
King Creole
Labyrinth of Horror
Lane Sisters
Lenore Coffee
Lenore J. Coffee
Life with Father (film)
Liliom (1919 film)
Little Big Shot (1935 film)
Lola Lane (actress/singer)
Lu, the Coquette
Lulu (1918 film)
Madonna of Avenue A
Magic Waltz
Mammy (1930 film)
Mandalay (film)
Master Zoard
Max Steiner
May Robson
Michael Curtiz
Michael Curtiz filmography
Mildred Pierce (film)
Mission to Moscow
Mountain Justice (1937 film)
Mr. Doctor (film)
Mrs. Dane's Confession
Mrs. Tutti Frutti
My Dream Is Yours
My Husband's Getting Married
Mystery of the Wax Museum
Nameless (1923 film)
Nathan Levinson
National Board of Review
Night and Day (1946 film)
Noah's Ark (1928 film)
Nobody's Son (film)
On Wings of Song (Mendelssohn)
Oscar Levant
Passage to Marseille
Pawnbroker
Peace's Road
Priscilla Lane
Prisoner of the Night (film)
Private Detective 62
Ralph Dawson
Ray Heindorf
Remake
River's End (1930 film)
Romance film
Romance on the High Seas
Rosemary Lane (actress)
Rotten Tomatoes
Roughly Speaking (film)
Santa Fe Trail (film)
Secret of St. Job Forest
Seven of Spades (film)
Sodom and Gomorrah (1922 film)
Sons of Liberty (film)
Spring in Winter
Stolen Holiday
Tartar Invasion
Tenderloin (film)
The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1960 film)
The Adventures of Robin Hood
The Best Things in Life Are Free (film)
The Black Rainbow
The Borrowed Babies
The Boy from Oklahoma
The Breaking Point (1950 film)
The Cabin in the Cotton
The Case of the Curious Bride
The Charge of the Light Brigade (1936 film)
The Charlatan (1917 film)
The Colonel (1918 film)
The Comancheros (film)
The Desired Woman
The Devil (1918 Hungarian film)
The Egyptian (film)
The Exile (1914 film)
The Fishing Bell
The Gamblers (1929 film)
The Golden Butterfly
The Hangman (1959 film)
The Helen Morgan Story
The Jazz Singer (1952 film)
The Karthauzer
The Kennel Murder Case (film)
The Key (1934 film)
The Keyhole (1933 film)
The Lady Takes a Sailor
The Lady with the Black Gloves
The Last Bohemian (1912 film)
The Last Dawn
The Mad Genius
The Man in the Net
The Matrimonial Bed
The Medic (1916 film)
The Merry Widow (1918 film)
The Moon of Israel
The New York Times
The Perfect Specimen
The Princess in a Nightrobe
The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex
The Proud Rebel
The Red Samson
The Scarlet Hour
The Scourge of God (film)
The Sea Hawk (1940 film)
The Sea Wolf (1941 film)
The Star of Damascus
The Story of Will Rogers
The Strange Love of Molly Louvain
The Strength of the Fatherland
The Sunflower Woman
The Third Degree (1926 film)
The Ugly Boy
The Unsuspected
The Vagabond King (1956 film)
The Walking Dead (1936 film)
The Wolf (1916 film)
The Woman from Monte Carlo
This Is the Army
Thyra Samter Winslow
Today and Tomorrow (1912 film)
Trouble Along the Way
Turner Classic Movies
Under a Texas Moon
Virginia City (film)
Warner Archive Collection
Warner Bros.
We're No Angels (1955 film)
White Christmas (film)
Yankee Doodle Dandy
Young Man with a Horn (film)
Young Medardus
Young at Heart (1954 film)
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1939
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/passions400.pdf
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=EE05E7DF173BE565BC4152DFBE668383629EDE
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v18310
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0030149/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/7131
https://nypost.com/2011/05/17/dvd-extra-southwest-noir-nude-dietrich-fonda-and-caine-go-south-the-prize-finally-bows/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/four_daughters
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/161/four-daughters#notes
https://catalog.afi.com/Film/7131-FOUR-DAUGHTERS?sid=406cb9c6-198b-4136-8236-a9f12bfd3ec1&sr=10.394301&cp=1&pos=0
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/161/four-daughters#articles-reviews?articleId=17904
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/161/enwp
