Gigi (1958 film)
Gigi (French pronunciation: [ʒiʒi]) is a 1958 American musical romantic comedy film directed by Vincente Minnelli and processed using Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's Eastmancolor film process Metrocolor. The screenplay by Alan Jay Lerner is based on the 1944 novella of the same name by Colette. The film features songs with lyrics by Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe, arranged and conducted by André Previn. Costume design was done by Cecil Beaton (hats by Madame Paulette).
At the 31st Academy Awards, the film won all nine of its nominations, including Best Picture and Best Director for Minnelli. It held the record for the highest clean sweep of nominations (later shared with The Last Emperor) until The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King won all eleven of its nominations at the 76th Academy Awards in 2004.
In 1991, Gigi was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". The American Film Institute ranked it number 35 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions. The film is considered the last great Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer musical and the final great achievement of the Freed Unit, headed by producer Arthur Freed.


== Plot ==
The film is set during the Belle Époque at the turn of the 20th century. While in Bois de Boulogne, Honoré Lachaille remarks that in Paris, marriage is not the sole option for wealthy young bon vivants like his nephew Gaston, who is bored with life. Gaston does enjoy spending time with Madame Alvarez and her granddaughter, precocious, carefree Gilberte, affectionately known as Gigi. Gigi's mother (a singer who is heard but never seen onscreen) leaves her care mostly to Madame Alvarez.
Following the "family tradition", Madame Alvarez regularly sends Gigi to her sister, Gigi's Great-Aunt Alicia to be groomed as a courtesan, a kept mistress of wealthy men. Gigi learns proper etiquette and charm, but disdains the trivial love between a man and his mistress. She prefers to have fun with Gaston, whom she regards as an older brother or a young uncle.
Like his uncle, Gaston is a known wealthy womanizer in Parisian high society. When his latest mistress has an affair with her ice-skating instructor, Gaston publicly humiliates her, resulting in her faux-attempted suicide. Gaston plans to retreat to the country, but his uncle insists that he remain in Paris and attend even more parties.
While playing cards with Gaston, Gigi wagers that if he loses, he must take her and her grandmother to the seaside for the weekend. Gaston agrees, loses the bet, and the three travel to Trouville. While Gaston and Gigi have fun together, Honoré and Madame Alvarez unexpectedly reunite and reminisce about their once-passionate affair. As other women at the resort hold perfect poise with an air of boredom or disdain for anything unfamiliar, Gigi pulls Gaston out of his depressive rut with her carefree attitude.
When Gaston goes to Monte Carlo, Great-Aunt Alicia and Madame Alvarez scheme to turn Gigi into Gaston's mistress. Though initially dubious, Madame Alvarez agrees to Gigi being intensively trained before Gaston's return. Gigi accepts this as pre-destined.
When Gaston returns, he is discomfited when Gigi shows off her new womanly gown. Gaston insults the dress, preferring her juvenile outfits; Gigi mocks his taste in clothes. Offended, Gaston storms out, then quickly realizes his folly and returns to apologize. He offers to take Gigi to tea at the Reservoir, but Madame Alvarez interjects, telling Gaston that an unchaperoned Gigi being seen in public with him could damage her reputation.
Angered, Gaston storms out again. He walks and reflects on Gigi, realizing he has developed a romantic desire for her. Although hesitant due to her young age, Gaston realizes that he loves Gigi. He wishes only to be near her—an unheard-of behavior between a man and his mistress. Despite such conventions, he proposes a generous "business arrangement" to Madame Alvarez and Aunt Alicia for Gigi to become his mistress. The women are overjoyed by his offer, though Gigi is not.
Gigi refuses, telling Gaston she does not seek celebrity status, only to eventually be abandoned by him and become another man's mistress. She wants their relationship to remain platonic, but when Gaston suddenly reveals that he loves her, Gigi bursts into tears. She chastises him, saying if he truly loved her, he would never expose her to a mistress's uncertain life. Gaston leaves dejected and is angry at Madame Alvarez, claiming she only emphasized the proposition's sordidness. He then speaks with Honoré, who says that Gigi's family has always been rather odd. Gigi later sends for Gaston and tells him that she would rather be miserable with him than without him, and agrees to the arrangement. When Gaston arrives for their first social outing, he is unexpectedly entranced by the transformed Gigi's elegant beauty.
The couple go to Maxim's restaurant. Gigi performs perfectly as his courtesan, which only upsets Gaston. After presenting her with an expensive emerald bracelet, he grows uneasy with the unrelenting scrutiny being heaped on them. Honoré delivers a crushing blow when he congratulates Gaston on his new courtesan and remarks that Gigi is so delightful that she will likely keep him amused for months.
Gaston, too in love with Gigi to subject her to an appalling life of uncertainty and social judgment, brusquely insists they leave. He drags Gigi up the stairs and into her grandmother's apartment. Sobbing hysterically, Gigi asks what she did wrong. Gaston leaves without answering, but realizing the depth of his love, soon returns. He asks Madame Alvarez for Gigi's hand in marriage. Gigi is overjoyed, as is her grandmother. 
The final sequence returns to Honoré Lachaille, who proudly points out Gaston and Gigi getting into a carriage in the Bois de Boulogne: elegant, beautiful, and happily married.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Hollywood producer Arthur Freed first proposed a musicalization of the Colette novella to Alan Jay Lerner during the Philadelphia tryout of My Fair Lady in 1954. When Lerner arrived in Hollywood two years later, Freed was battling the Hays Code to bring his tale of a courtesan-in-training to the screen. Another roadblock to the project was the fact Colette's widower had sold the rights to her novella to Gilbert Miller, who planned to produce a film version of the 1954 stage adaptation by Anita Loos. It cost Freed more than $87,000 to purchase the rights from Miller and Loos.Lerner's songwriting partner Frederick Loewe had expressed no interest in working in Hollywood, so Lerner agreed to write the screenplay only. He and Freed discussed casting; Lerner favored Audrey Hepburn, who had starred in the Broadway production written by Loos, but Freed preferred 
MGM contract star Leslie Caron, who had co-starred in An American in Paris for him. Both agreed Maurice Chevalier would be ideal for aging boulevardier Honoré Lachaille, and Lerner proposed Dirk Bogarde for Gaston. Lerner agreed to write the lyrics if Freed could convince Bogarde and designer Cecil Beaton to join the project. He decided to approach Loewe once again, and when he suggested they compose the score in Paris, Loewe agreed.In March 1957, the duo began working in Paris. When Chevalier, who already had agreed to appear in the film, first heard "Thank Heaven for Little Girls", he was delighted. When he discussed his waning interest in wine and women in favor of performing for an audience in cabarets, Chevalier inadvertently inspired the creation of another tune for his character, "I'm Glad I'm Not Young Anymore". The lyrics for another of his songs, the duet "I Remember It Well", performed with Hermione Gingold as his former love Madame Alvarez, were adapted from words Lerner had written for Love Life, a 1948 collaboration with Kurt Weill. "Say a Prayer for Me Tonight", a solo performed by Gigi, had been written for Eliza Doolittle in My Fair Lady but was removed during the pre-Broadway run. Lerner disliked the melody, but Loewe, Freed, and Minnelli voted to include it in the film.


=== Casting ===
Lerner recalls that for the film Gigi, "The casting was so haphazard, I don't know how they ever got it on." He wrote the part of Honoré Lachaille for Chevalier, but the rest of the casting was still undecided. Having second thoughts about Audrey Hepburn, Freed asked Lerner to meet with her in Paris, but she declined the role. The producer then asked him to fly to London to speak to Leslie Caron, who was living there with her husband Peter Hall. Lerner was surprised to discover the star had become anglicized to the point of losing her French accent. She had recently starred in an unsuccessful stage production of Gigi, but when she heard Lerner's interpretation of the story greatly differed from that of the play, she accepted his offer. Her singing voice was dubbed by Betty Wand, though Caron filmed mainly to her own tracks (a brief clip of Caron's voice is heard in the DVD extras). Dirk Bogarde expressed interest, as well, but ultimately was unable to free himself from his contract with J. Arthur Rank. Recalling Louis Jourdan from his performance in Three Coins in the Fountain, Freed offered him the role of Gaston.


=== Filming ===
In late April, Freed and Minnelli and their entourages arrived in Paris. The weather had become unseasonably hot, and working in hotel rooms without air-conditioning was uncomfortable. Minnelli began scouting locations while Freed and Lerner discussed the still incomplete script. Lerner had taken liberties with Colette's novella; the character of Honoré, nonexistent in the original book and very minor in the Loos play, was now a major figure. Gigi's mother, originally a significant character, was reduced to a few lines of dialogue delivered off-screen. Lerner also expanded the focus on Gigi's relationship with her grandmother.A signature scene was filmed on location at Maxim's, the famous Belle Epoque restaurant with its ornate Art Nouveau mirrored walls. Shooting at the restaurant was a logistical nightmare, as the mirrors reflected lighting equipment, the camera, and other undesirable behind-the-scenes artifacts. Minelli and cinematographer Joseph Ruttenberg worked together to come up with careful camera placements and a low-light visual scheme so that the location could be used without covering up the iconic mirrors. Ruttenberg even managed to cut down on the need for lighting stands and securing lights in corners by attaching lights with suction cups.By mid-July, the composers had completed most of the score, but still were missing the title tune. Loewe was at the piano while Lerner was indisposed in the bathroom, and when the former began playing a melody the latter liked, he later recalled he jumped up, "[his] trousers still clinging to [his] ankles, and made his way to the living room. 'Play that again,' he said. And that melody ended up being the title song for Gigi."In September, the cast and crew flew to California, where several interior scenes were filmed, among them the entire scene in Maxim's, which included a musical number by Jourdan. Lerner was unhappy with the look of the scene as it had been shot by Minnelli, so, at considerable expense, the restaurant was recreated on a soundstage and the scene was reshot by director Charles Walters, since Minnelli was overseas working on a new project.The film title design uses the artwork of Sem's work from the Belle Époque.


=== Musical numbers ===
Overture – Played by MGM Studio Orchestra
"Honoré's Soliloquy" – Sung by Maurice Chevalier
"Thank Heaven for Little Girls" – Sung by Maurice Chevalier
"It's a Bore" – Sung by Maurice Chevalier, Louis Jourdan and John Abbott
"The Parisians" – Sung by Betty Wand
"The Gossips" – Sung by Maurice Chevalier and MGM Studio Chorus
"She is Not Thinking of Me" – Sung by Louis Jourdan
"The Night They Invented Champagne" – Sung by Betty Wand, Hermione Gingold and Louis Jourdan
"I Remember It Well" – Sung by Maurice Chevalier and Hermione Gingold
"Gaston's Soliloquy" – Sung by Louis Jourdan
"Gigi" – Sung by Louis Jourdan
"I'm Glad I'm Not Young Anymore" – Sung by Maurice Chevalier
"Say a Prayer for Me Tonight" – Sung by Betty Wand
"Thank Heaven for Little Girls (Reprise)" – Sung by Maurice Chevalier and MGM Studio ChorusThe principal credited orchestrator was Conrad Salinger with vocal arrangements supervised by Robert Tucker. The conductor and general music supervisor was André Previn.


== Release ==
Following completion of the film, it was previewed in Santa Barbara. Audience reaction was overwhelmingly favorable, but Lerner and Loewe were dissatisfied with the result. Lerner felt it was twenty minutes too long and most of the action too slow. The changes he proposed would cost an additional $300,000, money Freed was loath to spend. The songwriting team offered to buy 10% of the film for $300,000, then offered $3 million for the print. Impressed with their belief in the film, MGM executives agreed to the changes, which included eleven days of considerable reshooting, putting the project at $400,000 over budget. At a preview in Encino, audience reaction changed from "appreciation to affection", and Lerner felt the film finally was ready for release. It premiered at the Royale Theatre, a legitimate theatrical venue in New York City, on May 15, 1958.The film had 10 reserved seat engagements in the United States before opening in selected cities on a continuous run basis from October 2, 1958. The film entered saturation release in the United States with 450 prints on April 1, 1959.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
According to MGM records, the film earned $6.5 million in the US and Canada and $3.2 million elsewhere during its initial theatrical release, resulting in a profit of $1,983,000. It was Freed's last and largest grossing success.In total, the film grossed $13,208,725 in its initial release and later 1966 re-release.


=== Critical reception ===
In the 1959 review for Sight & Sound, David Vaughan calls Gigi "an elegant film" with a "cultivated visual taste [which] is everywhere apparent". He summarizes that "while Gigi does not represent a revival of the MGM musical in its heyday, it is a welcome extension of latter-day musical style in its adult subject-matter and its avoidance of spectacle made vulgar by emphasis on size." He praises Minnelli's talent for "the delicious amorality of the anecdote, but also the honesty and irony of its telling [which] have become foreign to the American cinema." Vaughan points out "Chevalier's practiced but irresistible charm [as] one of the film's greatest assets" as well as "the brilliant high-comedy playing of Isabel Jeans, who as Aunt Alicia consummately portrays the distinction and beauty of a retired aristocrat of the demimonde."Bosley Crowther of The New York Times called it "a musical film that bears such a basic resemblance to My Fair Lady that the authors may want to sue themselves". He added, "But don't think this point of resemblance is made in criticism of the film, for Gigi is a charming entertainment that can stand on its own two legs. It is not only a charming comprehension of the spicy confection of Colette, but it is also a lovely and lyrical enlargement upon that story's flavored mood and atmosphere ... Vincente Minnelli has marshaled a cast to give a set of performances that, for quality and harmony, are superb."Abel Green of Variety called the film "100% escapist fare" and predicted it "is destined for a global box-office mop-up". He added, "Alan Jay Lerner's libretto is tailor-made for an inspired casting job for all principals, and Fritz Loewe's tunes (to Lerner's lyrics) already vie with and suggest their memorable My Fair Lady score... Miss Caron is completely captivating and convincing in the title role... Skillful casting, performance and presentation have endowed realism to the sum total... Director Minnelli's good taste in keeping it in bounds and the general sound judgment of all concerned...distinguishes this Arthur Freed independent production. The Metrocolor rates recognition for its soft pastels under Joseph Ruttenberg's lensing; the Beaton costumes, sets and general production design are vivid physical assets at first sight. The skillful integration of words-and-music with the plot motivation makes this Gigi a very fair lady indeed as a boxoffice entry."Time Out New York said, "The dominating creative contribution comes from Minnelli and Cecil Beaton ... The combination of these two visual elitists is really too much—it's like a meal consisting of cheesecake, and one quickly longs for something solid and vulgar to weigh things down. No doubt inspired by the finicky, claustrophobic sets and bric-à-brac, the cast tries (with unfortunate success) to be more French than the French, especially Chevalier. The exception is Gingold, who inhabits, as always, a world of her own."TV Guide rated the film 3½ out of five stars, calling it "Overbaked but enjoyable, and a banquet for the eyes, thanks to the visual wonder of the Minnelli-Beaton teaming... Caron...leads the cast in a contest to see who can be the most French. The winner is Chevalier, in a performance that makes one feel as if you're gagging on pastry... Perhaps if the sweetness of Gigi was contrasted with elements of honest vulgarity, the picture could balance itself out... Ten minutes into the movie, you've resolved the plot and are left to wallow in lovely frou-frou. [The film] makes wonderful use of the usual Parisian landmarks, and benefits from extraordinary period costumes and sets."On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 88% from 76 reviews, with an average rating of 7.6/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "It may not be one of Vincente Minnelli's best, but the charming and flawlessly acted Gigi still offers enough visual and musical treats to satisfy." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 82 out of 100 based on 13 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".


=== Awards and nominations ===
With all 9 nominations, Gigi won a record-breaking nine Academy Awards (at the 1959 Oscars ceremony); however, this record only lasted for one year, as Ben-Hur broke this record the following year with 11 Oscars.  In tribute to Gigi's domination of the Oscars, the MGM switchboard answered calls the following day with "M-Gigi-M". Gigi, eventually along with 1987's The Last Emperor, held the record as the film(s) with the most Academy Award wins in every category in which it was nominated, until 2003's The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King broke the record at the 2004 Oscars ceremony with 11 Oscar nominations and 11 Oscar wins.

American Film Institute lists:

AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions -#35
AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs
Thank Heaven for Little Girls -#56


=== Digital restoration ===
In about 2008, the film was digitally restored by Prasad Studios, which removed dirt, tears, scratches, and other defects frame by frame.


== Popular culture ==
Jazz trumpeter, bandleader, and arranger Shorty Rogers released an album of Lerner and Loewe's music, Gigi in Jazz, in 1958.
The soundtrack album cover appears on the cover for Pink Floyd's Ummagumma (1969) album, designed by Storm Thorgerson. For the US/Canada and Australian releases the cover was airbrushed out because of fears of copyright infringement. The artwork was restored in the later CD releases in all territories.
Edith Bouvier Beale (best known as "Little Edie") mentioned several times in the Maysles brothers 1975 documentary Grey Gardens that Gigi was "absolutely marvelous".
In the book series, The Mother Daughter Book Club by Heather Vogel Frederick, the character Gigi gets her nickname from her love of the musical.


== See also ==
List of American films of 1958


== References ==


=== Bibliography ===


== External links ==

Gigi at IMDb 
Gigi at the TCM Movie Database
Gigi at AllMovie
Gigi at the American Film Institute Catalog
Gigi at Box Office Mojo
Gigi at Rotten Tomatoes
Gigi essay by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010 ISBN 0826429777, pages 547-57911th Directors Guild of America Awards
11th Writers Guild of America Awards
12 Years a Slave (film)
13th British Academy Film Awards
16th Golden Globe Awards
1917 (2019 film)
1st Annual Grammy Awards
2001: A Space Odyssey (film)
31st Academy Awards
76th Academy Awards
AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions
AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Heart in Winter
A Majority of One (film)
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Matter of Time (film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Separation
A Star Is Born (1976 film)
Abel Green
Academy Award
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Original Song
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Adrienne Fazan
Alan Jay Lerner
AllMovie
All About Eve
All About My Mother
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
Almost Famous
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Film Institute
American Graffiti
American Hustle
An American in Paris (film)
André Previn
Anglicization
Anita Loos
Annie Get Your Gun (film)
Annie Hall
Any Number Can Play
Archive.org
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arthur (1981 film)
Arthur Freed
As Good as It Gets
Au revoir les enfants
Audrey Hepburn
Auntie Mame (film)
BAFTA Award for Best Film
Babe (film)
Babel (film)
Babes in Arms (film)
Babes on Broadway
Beauty and the Beast (1991 film)
Belfast (film)
Belle Époque
Bells Are Ringing (film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Bernard B. Jacobs Theatre
Best Foot Forward (film)
Betty Wand
Birdman (film)
Bois de Boulogne
Borat Subsequent Moviefilm
Bosley Crowther
Box Office Mojo
Braveheart
Breaking Away
Bridge of Spies (film)
Brigadoon
Brigadoon (1966 film)
Brigadoon (film)
Bright Lights Film Journal
British Board of Film Classification
Broadway theatre
CODA (2021 film)
Cabaret
Cabaret (1972 film)
Cabin in the Sky (film)
Camelot (film)
Camelot (musical)
Carmen Jones (film)
Casablanca (film)
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Cecil Beaton
Chariots of Fire
Charles Walters
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Tribune
Cimarron (1931 film)
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Coal Miner's Daughter (film)
Colette
Conrad Salinger
Courtesan
Crash (2004 film)
Crisis (1950 film)
Cyrano de Bergerac (1990 film)
Da Capo Press
Dances with Wolves
David di Donatello
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Film
Dead Poets Society
Designing Woman
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Dirk Bogarde
Django Unchained
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dreamgirls (film)
Drive-in theater
Driving Miss Daisy
Du Barry Was a Lady (film)
Dunkirk (2017 film)
E. Preston Ames
Easter Parade (film)
Eastmancolor
Edith Bouvier Beale
Edward Jablonski
Eliza Doolittle
Encino, California
Eva Gabor
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Evita (1996 film)
F. Keogh Gleason
Fandango Media
Fandom, Inc.
Fanny and Alexander
Father's Little Dividend
Father of the Bride (1950 film)
Fiddler on the Roof (film)
Film preservation
Film title design
For Me and My Gal (film)
Forrest Gump
Frederick Loewe
From Here to Eternity
Gandhi (film)
Gentleman's Agreement
Gigi (1949 film)
Gigi (musical)
Gigi (novella)
Gigi (play)
Gigi (song)
Gigi in Jazz
Gilbert Miller
Girl Crazy (1943 film)
Gladiator (2000 film)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture
Gone with the Wind (film)
Good News (1947 film)
Goodbye Charlie
Grammy Award for Best Sound Track Album or Recording of Original Cast From a Motion Picture or Television
Gran Torino
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Green Book (film)
Green Card (film)
Grey Gardens
Guess Who's Coming to Dinner
Guys and Dolls (film)
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hannah and Her Sisters
Hays Code
Heaven Can Wait (1978 film)
Henry Grace
Hereafter (film)
Hermione Gingold
Home from the Hill (film)
Hope and Glory (film)
How Green Was My Valley (film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Dood It
In the Heat of the Night (film)
In the Name of the Father (film)
Inglourious Basterds
Invitation to the Dance (film)
Isabel Jeans
It's Always Fair Weather
It Happened One Night
J. Arthur Rank
Jacques Bergerac
Jesus Christ Superstar (film)
John Abbott (actor, born 1905)
Joseph Ruttenberg
Judgment at Nuremberg
Kismet (1955 film)
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kurt Weill
La La Land
Lady Be Good (1941 film)
Lady Bird (film)
Laurel Awards
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Lerner and Loewe
Les Girls
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Leslie Caron
Library of Congress
Libretto
Life of the Party (musical)
Light in the Piazza (film)
List of American films of 1958
Little Nellie Kelly
Lost in Translation (film)
Louis Jourdan
Love Life (musical)
Lust for Life (1956 film)
M*A*S*H (film)
Madame Bovary (1949 film)
Marathon Man (film)
Marie-Hélène Arnaud
Marty (film)
Maurice Chevalier
Maxim's
Maysles brothers
Meet Me in St. Louis
Meet the People
Mephisto (1981 film)
Metacritic
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Metrocolor
Midnight Cowboy
Million Dollar Baby
Moonlight (2016 film)
Moulin Rouge!
Mrs. Doubtfire
Mrs. Miniver
Musical film
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady
My Fair Lady (film)
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Awards 1958
National Film Preservation Board
National Film Registry
Nelly and Mr. Arnaud
No Country for Old Men
Nocturnal Animals
Nomadland
Novella
Oliver! (film)
On a Clear Day You Can See Forever (film)
On the Town (film)
On the Waterfront
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Ordinary People
Out of Africa (film)
Overture
Pagan Love Song
Paint Your Wagon (film)
Paint Your Wagon (musical)
Panama Hattie
Parasite (2019 film)
Patton (film)
Peter Hall (director)
Philadelphia
Photoplay
Pink Floyd
Platoon (film)
Porgy and Bess (film)
Prasad Studios
Prizzi's Honor
Pulp Fiction
Rain Man
Raise the Red Lantern
Rebecca (1940 film)
Ridicule (film)
Roadshow theatrical release
Rocky
Roma (2018 film)
Romancing the Stone
Romantic comedy
Rotten Tomatoes
Royal Wedding
Ryan's Daughter
Santa Barbara, California
Schindler's List
Sem (artist)
Shakespeare in Love
Sheldon Hall (film historian)
Shorty Rogers
Show Boat (1951 film)
Sideways
Sight & Sound
Silk Stockings (1957 film)
Singin' in the Rain
Slumdog Millionaire
Soliloquy
Some Came Running (film)
Some Like It Hot
Song Without End
Soundstage
Spotlight (film)
Storm Thorgerson
Strike Up the Band (film)
Summer Holiday (1948 film)
Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (2007 film)
TV Guide
Take Me Out to the Ball Game (film)
Tea and Sympathy (film)
Terms of Endearment
Thank Heaven for Little Girls
That Touch of Mink
The Agony and the Ecstasy (film)
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Bad and the Beautiful
The Band Wagon
The Banshees of Inisherin
The Barbarian Invasions
The Barkleys of Broadway
The Belle of New York (1952 film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Clock (1945 film)
The Cobweb (1955 film)
The Courtship of Eddie's Father (film)
The Day Before Spring
The Deer Hunter
The Departed
The English Patient (film)
The Fabelmans
The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (1962 film)
The French Connection (film)
The Full Monty
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Goodbye Girl
The Graduate
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Hangover
The Harvey Girls
The Hurt Locker
The Kids Are All Right (film)
The King's Speech
The King and I (1956 film)
The Last Emperor
The Last Emperor (film)
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion King
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Little Prince (1974 film)
The Long, Long Trailer
The Longest Day (film)
The Longest Yard (1974 film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Man Who Wasn't There (2001 film)
The Martian (film)
The Music Man (1962 film)
The New York Times
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Pirate (1948 film)
The Player (1992 film)
The Prince and the Showgirl
The Reluctant Debutante (film)
The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming
The Sandpiper
The Secret of Santa Vittoria
The Shape of Water
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Sound of Music (film)
The Sting
The Story of Three Loves
The Subterraneans (film)
The Sunshine Boys (1975 film)
The Taste of Others
The Towering Inferno
The Wishing Tree (1976 film)
The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)
Three Coins in the Fountain (1954 film)
Till the Clouds Roll By
Time Out (company)
Titanic (1997 film)
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tootsie
Toy Story 2
Train of Life
Trouville-sur-Mer
Turner Classic Movies
Two Weeks in Another Town
Ummagumma
Undercurrent (1946 film)
Unforgiven
University of California Press
Variety (magazine)
Vicky Cristina Barcelona
Vincente Minnelli
W. W. Norton & Company
Walk the Line
Wayne State University Press
West Side Story (1961 film)
West Side Story (2021 film)
What's Up? (musical)
William A. Horning
Wings (1927 film)
With a Song in My Heart (film)
Words and Music (1948 film)
Working Girl
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written Musical
Yentl (film)
Yola Letellier
Yolanda and the Thief
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Ziegfeld Follies (film)
http://www.timeout.com/film/newyork/reviews/70189/Gigi.html
http://www.bbfc.co.uk/AFF013947/
http://www.prasadgroup.org/services/digital-film-restoration/
https://viaf.org/viaf/215957724
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9E00EFDC173DE53BBC4E52DFB3668383649EDE
http://articles.latimes.com/2008/oct/09/entertainment/et-caron9
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v19761
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4655996-6
https://web.archive.org/web/20090113134928/http://www.timeout.com/film/newyork/reviews/70189/Gigi.html
https://variety.com/1958/film/reviews/gigi-2-1200419205/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0051658/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/52564
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=gigi.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/gigi
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb16656634g
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb16656634g
http://www.archive.org/stream/variety214-1959-03#page/n156/mode/1up
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q577757#identifiers
https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-1991-09-26-9103130465-story.html
https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/12586/enwp
https://www.tvguide.com/movies/gigi/review/2030119529
https://books.google.com/books?id=4GNRD_icEmkC
https://web.archive.org/web/20170811222242/http://www.prasadgroup.org/services/digital-film-restoration/
http://www.archive.org/stream/variety212-1958-09#page/n313/mode/1up
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/gigi
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q577757#P345
