Hamlet (1948 film)
Hamlet  is a 1948 British film adaptation of William Shakespeare's play of the same name, adapted and directed by and starring Laurence Olivier. Hamlet was Olivier's second film as director and the second of the three Shakespeare films that he directed (the 1936 As You Like It had starred Olivier, but had been directed by Paul Czinner). Hamlet was the first British film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture. It is the first sound film of the play in English.
Olivier's Hamlet is the Shakespeare film that has received the most prestigious accolades, winning the Academy Awards for Best Picture and Best Actor and the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival. However, it proved controversial among Shakespearean purists, who felt that Olivier had made too many alterations and excisions to the four-hour play by cutting nearly two hours' worth of content. Milton Shulman wrote in The Evening Standard: "To some it will be one of the greatest films ever made, to others a deep disappointment. Laurence Olivier leaves no doubt that he is one of our greatest living actors... his liberties with the text, however, are sure to disturb many."


== Plot ==
O, the battlements of Elsinore, Francisco, a sentry, is relieved of his watch by another sentry, Bernardo, who, with yet another sentry, Marcellus, has twice previously seen the Ghost of King Hamlet. Marcellus then arrives with the sceptical Horatio, Prince Hamlet's friend. Suddenly, all three see the Ghost, and Horatio demands that the ghost speak. The ghost vanishes then, without a word.
Inside the Great Hall of the castle, the court is celebrating the marriage of Gertrude and King Claudius; old King Hamlet has died apparently of an accidental snakebite, and his wife, Gertrude, has, within a month of the tragedy, married the late King's brother. Prince Hamlet sits alone, refusing to join in the celebration, despite the protests of the new King. When the court has left the Great Hall, Hamlet fumes over the hasty marriage, muttering to himself the words "and yet, within a month!"
Soon, Horatio and the sentries enter telling Hamlet of the ghostly apparition of his father. Hamlet proceeds to investigate, and upon arriving on the battlements, sees the ghost. Noting that the ghost beckons him forward, Hamlet follows it up onto a tower, wherein it reveals its identity as the Ghost of Hamlet's father. He tells Hamlet that he was murdered, who did it, and how it was done. Claudius poured poison into the late King Hamlet's ear, thereby killing him. Hamlet does not at first accept this as the truth, and then prepares to feign madness, so as to test Claudius' conscience, without jumping to conclusions.
This feigned insanity attracts the attention of Polonius who is completely convinced that Hamlet has gone mad. Polonius pushes this point with the King, claiming that it is derived from Hamlet's love for Ophelia, Polonius's daughter. Claudius, however, is not fully convinced, and has Polonius set up a meeting between Hamlet and Ophelia. Hamlet's "madness" is constant even in this exchange, and Claudius is convinced.
Hamlet then hires a group of wandering stage performers, requesting that they enact the play The Murder of Gonzago for the king. However, Hamlet makes a few alterations to the play, so as to make it mirror the circumstances of the late King's murder. Claudius, unable to endure the play, calls out for light, and retires to his room. Hamlet is now convinced of Claudius' treachery. He finds Claudius alone, and has ample opportunity to kill the villain. However, at this time, Claudius is praying, and Hamlet does not seek to send him to heaven, so, he waits, and bides his time.
He instead confronts Gertrude about the matter of his father's death and Claudius' treachery. During this confrontation, he hears a voice from the arras, and, believing that it was Claudius eavesdropping, plunges his dagger into the curtains. On discovering that he has in fact, killed the eavesdropping Polonius instead, Hamlet is only mildly upset, and he continues to confront his mother. He then sees the ghostly apparition of his father, and proceeds to converse with it. Gertrude, who cannot see the ghost, becomes convinced that Hamlet is mad.
Hamlet is deported to England by Claudius, who has given orders for him to be killed once he reaches there. Fortunately, Hamlet's ship is attacked by pirates, and he is returned to Denmark. In his absence, however, Ophelia goes mad over Hamlet's rejection and the idea that her own sweetheart has killed her father, and she drowns, supposedly committing suicide. Laertes, Ophelia's brother, is driven to avenge her death, as well as his father's.
Claudius and Laertes learn of Hamlet's return and prepare to have him killed. However, they plan to make it look like an accident. Claudius orders Laertes to challenge Hamlet to a duel, wherein Laertes will be given a poisoned blade that will kill with a bare touch. In case Laertes is unable to hit Hamlet, Claudius also prepares a poisoned drink.
Hamlet meets Laertes' challenge and engages him in a duel. Hamlet wins the first two rounds, and Gertrude drinks from the cup, suspecting that it is poisoned. Whilst in-between bouts, Laertes rushes Hamlet and strikes him on the arm, fatally poisoning him. Hamlet, not knowing this, continues to duel. Hamlet eventually disarms Laertes and switches blades with him. Hamlet then strikes Laertes in the wrist, fatally wounding him. Gertrude then submits to the poison and dies, warning Hamlet not to drink from the cup.
Laertes, dying, confesses the whole plot to Hamlet, who flies at Claudius in a fit of rage, killing him, then dies. Horatio, horrified by all this, orders that Hamlet be given a decent funeral, and the young prince's body is taken away while the Danish court kneels and the cannons of Elsinore fire off a peal of ordnance in respect.


== Cast ==


=== The Royal Court of Denmark ===
Basil Sydney as Claudius, the King. Claudius is the brother, and murderer, of the late King Hamlet, and he marries his brother's widow only two months after the King's death. An English actor, Sydney had a long and prolific career on both stage and screen. In 1923, at the age of 29, he played Hamlet in a modern-dress stage production. He subsequently appeared with Olivier in The Devil's Disciple.
Eileen Herlie as Gertrude, the Queen. Gertrude, now married to Claudius, does not suspect foul play, and she fears for the sanity of her son. A Scottish-American actress, Herlie was born in Scotland and worked in the UK on film and stage productions until the mid-1950s, when she moved permanently to the U.S., where she worked mainly on stage and TV. (Her role as Gertrude was secured by arrangement with Sir Alexander Korda, to whom she was under contract.) She had previously played Gertrude on stage in 1945 to the Hamlet of Peter Glenville. She would repeat the part in the 1964 Broadway production starring Richard Burton as Hamlet.
Laurence Olivier as Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. Hamlet is the conflicted son of the late King, who is now suspicious of his father's death. Olivier, considered by many to be the greatest actor of the 20th century, had played this role twice on stage in 1937, at the Old Vic Theatre and later at Elsinore Castle, the actual setting of the play. His 1948 film performance of the role was the only one of his to win him an Academy Award for Best Actor, despite three prior nominations, and five subsequent ones. Olivier, however, did receive several Honorary Oscars, the first in 1947 for Henry V.
Norman Wooland as Horatio, his friend. Horatio is Hamlet's level-headed fellow student from the University of Wittenberg. Wooland was an English actor, born in Germany, who subsequently had a long career in British and international films. He later played another companion to Olivier's character in Richard III.
Felix Aylmer as Polonius, Lord Chamberlain. Polonius is suspicious of Hamlet, and he is convinced that Hamlet's supposed insanity stems from the young prince's love for his daughter, Ophelia. Aylmer was an actor and author who had a long career on stage and screen. He was a long-serving President of the actors' union Equity and a champion of screen acting, which he felt was undervalued. He had previously worked with Olivier on his Henry V as well as on As You Like It, which starred Olivier.
Terence Morgan as Laertes, his Son. Laertes arrives in Denmark to discover his father killed by Hamlet, and Ophelia, his sister, first driven mad and then to her own death. He vows vengeance against Hamlet. Morgan was an English actor, who was discovered by Olivier in 1945 at the age of 23 and joined the Old Vic company in 1948. He had a prolific career as one of the most highly-paid stars of British films throughout the 1950s.
Jean Simmons as Ophelia, and Daughter. Ophelia is driven mad by her father Polonius' death, as well as by Hamlet's rejection. Simmons' performance in this film earned her a nomination for Best Supporting Actress at the 1949 Oscars. An English actress, she had a subsequent career as a major Hollywood star. She appeared with Olivier again in Spartacus.
King Hamlet. Hamlet's father, Claudius' older brother, and Gertrude's first husband, who appears in Shakespeare's play as the Ghost of Hamlet's Father. This character has no screen credit. The part was played- and voiced - by Laurence Olivier himself. Olivier is recognisable as the king in the flashback sequence showing the sleeping King Hamlet being poisoned by his brother Claudius. (Where Hamlet and the Ghost appear together in the same shot an unidentified stand-in plays the Ghost.)


=== Men at Arms ===
John Laurie as Francisco. Francisco is a weary sentry, who is relieved by Bernardo at the beginning of the film. A Scottish actor, Laurie appeared in all three Olivier-directed Shakespeare films, as well as the 1936 film As You Like It, which starred Olivier.
Esmond Knight as Bernardo [sometimes spelled Barnardo]. Bernardo is a sentry who is sent to relieve Francisco and sees the apparition of King Hamlet. He and Marcellus have seen it twice before, but they've found it difficult to convince Horatio until he sees it himself. A Welsh actor, Knight appeared in all three of Olivier's Shakespeare films, as well as Olivier's The Prince and the Showgirl.
Anthony Quayle as Marcellus. Marcellus is another sentry. He and Bernardo have already seen the ghost twice before and see it again. (Quayle is replaced in certain shots by another, uncredited, performer.) An English actor and stage director, Quayle spent several years as Artistic Director of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon. He became a star of British cinema from the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s.[All of the above characters reappear at the end of the film, where they are three of the 'four captains' who 'bear Hamlet's body, like a soldier, to the stage'. They are accompanied by a fourth, unidentified, soldier and by Horatio.]

Niall MacGinnis as Sea Captain. The 'Sea Captain' (a character invented for the film) is the captain of the pirate ship on which Hamlet is stranded after he sets out for England. The captain's lines, though, are from the original play, where they are spoken by a sailor. An Irish actor with a long career in British and international films, MacGinnis had previously appeared in Olivier's Henry V.
Christopher Lee, an English actor who later became famous as a star of Hammer horror films, has an uncredited role as a guard with no spoken lines.


=== The Play within the Play ===
Harcourt Williams as First Player. The First Player is enlisted by Hamlet to alter the   company's play to mirror Hamlet's suspicions about Claudius. An English actor and stage director, Williams had previously appeared in Olivier's Henry V.
Patrick Troughton as Player King. The Player King enacts a mimed role that echoes Claudius' treachery. An English actor, best known for his role as the second incarnation of the Doctor in Doctor Who, he subsequently appeared in Olivier's Richard III.
Tony Tarver as Player Queen. The Player Queen is the Player King's wife. In Olivier's film she is a satire of Gertrude, intended to catch the conscience of Claudius. Tarver seems to have made no other film appearances.


=== Servants to the Court ===
Peter Cushing as Osric. Osric is a foppish courtier who referees the duel between Hamlet and Laertes. (In later film versions of the play, such as the 1969 one with Nicol Williamson, Osric would be made more openly 'swishy'.) An English actor, Cushing joined the Old Vic company in 1948, and he later became famous as a star of Hammer horror films.
Stanley Holloway as Gravedigger. (The Second Gravedigger of the play is omitted.) The Gravedigger is digging Ophelia's grave when Hamlet and Horatio come across him. An English actor, Holloway replaced Irish actor F. J. McCormick, who died prematurely before he could film his scenes.
Russell Thorndike as Priest. The Priest leads the funeral service for Ophelia. An English actor and novelist (the Doctor Syn series) and younger brother of Sybil Thorndike, he appeared in all three of Olivier's Shakespeare films.


== Production ==


=== Casting and filming ===
Eileen Herlie, who plays Hamlet's mother, was 29 years old when the movie was filmed in 1947. Olivier, who plays her son, was 40.
Olivier played the voice of the Ghost by recording the dialogue as an amplified whisper and playing it back at a reduced speed, giving it a deep, haunting other-worldly quality. However, for many years it was falsely assumed, even in film reference books, that John Gielgud had recorded the voice of the Ghost. (Gielgud played the role of the Ghost in three later productions – the 1964 stage, Electronovision and LP Album versions of Richard Burton's Hamlet, the 1970 telecast of the Hallmark Hall of Fame production starring Richard Chamberlain, and a 1992 BBC radio production starring Kenneth Branagh.)
Felix Barker, Olivier's first biographer, described how the actor-director created the sound effects for the three appearances of the ghost:To produce the eerie noise which preceded the appearance of the ghost Olivier...went to enormous trouble. He made as many as fourteen separate sound tracks. On one he had recorded fifty women shrieking; on another the groans of as many men; a third consisted of a dozen violinists scraping their bows across the strings on a single screeching note. These various tracks had then to be blended in different volumes and intensity until they produced a noise which seemed to him to resemble - on what authority is uncertain - 'the lid of hell being opened'. Supernatural horror was further increased by the pulsing heart-beat which heralded its every entrance. This sound, Olivier remembered, had been used by Jean-Louis Barrault in a stage production in Paris; he made it doubly effective on the screen by bringing the camera in and out of focus to synchronize with the pulsing. Before he would use it, however, he wrote to ask Barrault's permission and insisted on paying for the idea. Because no copyright is possible Olivier is particularly scrupulous about borrowing other people's production tricks or another actor's ideas.


=== Cinematography ===
The cinematography by Desmond Dickinson makes use of the deep focus photography previously popularised in films directed by William Wyler and Orson Welles.


=== Music ===
The music was composed by William Walton and, alongside his score for Olivier's 1944 film Henry V, has become his most celebrated film work.


== Box office ==
The film was popular at the British box office.Producer's receipts were £187,900 in the UK and £1,164,400 overseas. It made a reported profit of £779,700.


== Critical reception ==
The film's opening with Olivier's voiceover of his own interpretation of the play, was criticised as reductive: "This is the tragedy of a man who could not make up his mind."Olivier excised the "political" elements of the play (entirely cutting Fortinbras, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern) in favour of an intensely psychological performance, partly to save time. Olivier stated that "one great whacking cut had to be made", and the cut he chose to make was the omission of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. This was not much criticised at first, but later critics did take more notice of it, especially after shorter productions of Hamlet that did not leave out these characters were presented on television. John Gielgud took much the same approach years later by leaving out Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and Fortinbras from his 1951 radio production of the play, broadcast on the program Theatre Guild on the Air. Gielgud also followed the lead of Olivier's film version by giving the final lines of the play to Horatio instead of Fortinbras.Olivier heightened the Oedipal overtones of the play by having Hamlet kiss his mother lovingly on the lips several times during the film. Film scholar Jack Jorgens has commented that "Hamlet's scenes with the Queen in her low-cut gowns are virtually love scenes." In contrast, Jean Simmons' Ophelia is destroyed by Hamlet's treatment of her in the nunnery scene.
According to J. Lawrence Guntner, the style of the film owes much to German Expressionism and to film noir: The cavernous sets featuring narrow winding stairwells correspond to the labyrinths of Hamlet's psyche.On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 96% based on 49 reviews, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "A well-executed labor of love from star and director Laurence Olivier, Hamlet not only proved that Shakespeare could be successfully adapted to the big screen, it paved the way for further cinematic interpretations."


== Awards and honours ==
The film version of Hamlet was the only film in which the leading actor had directed himself to an Oscar-winning performance, until 1998, when Roberto Benigni directed himself to an Oscar win in Life Is Beautiful. Olivier is also the only actor to win an Oscar for a Shakespearean role. Hamlet was the only film to have won both the Golden Lion and the Academy Award for Best Picture until The Shape of Water in 2017, which was followed by Nomadland three years later. It is also the first non-American film to win the Best Picture Academy Award.


== Influence ==
In the past, the 1948 film was considered the definitive cinematic rendition of Hamlet. Over the years, however, it has lost some of its status, especially in competition with the unabridged 1996 adaptation, which many critics now consider superior, as well as the 1994 animated film The Lion King which was also based on Hamlet. The film has also been compared to Olivier's other Shakespearean adaptations, Henry V and Richard III. Some critics argue that Olivier overemphasised Hamlet's Oedipal fixation on his mother, and that due to the omission of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, two of the more important supporting characters in the play, the film lacks some of the play's best comedic moments. The duo's inclusion in later adaptations, such as the 1969 Nicol Williamson – Tony Richardson Hamlet and the 1990 Mel Gibson/Franco Zeffirelli version, both of which are shorter than Olivier's, counters Olivier's rationale that the play needed such drastic cuts to work on screen. Kenneth Branagh's 1996 film version of the complete Hamlet included everything that Olivier had omitted. It is worth noting, however, that the parts of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern (and Osric) are reduced in the Richardson and Zeffirelli versions, and that Branagh's version is almost 90 minutes longer than Olivier's.

Noted film critic Pauline Kael asserted that even if you feel that certain scenes should be done differently, when has the rest of the play been done so well? Whatever the omissions, the mutilations, the mistakes, this is very likely the most exciting and most alive production of Hamlet you will ever see on the screen. It's never dull, and if characters such as Fortinbras and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern have been sacrificed, it's remarkable how little they are missed.
James Agee in Time wrote in 1948: "A man who can do what Laurence Olivier is doing for Shakespeare is certainly among the more valuable men of his time."


== Television debut ==
Hamlet was the second of Olivier's Shakespeare films to be telecast on American television – the first was Richard III, which was given an afternoon rather than a prime-time showing by NBC on 11 March 1956, the same day that it premiered in cinemas in the U.S. ABC gave the Olivier Hamlet a prime time showing in December 1956, but like many theatrical films shown on television during that era, it was split into two 90-minute halves and telecast over a period of two weeks rather than being shown on one evening.


== Home media ==
In North America, Olivier's Hamlet has been released on DVD as part of The Criterion Collection, which has released his film versions of Henry V and Richard III on DVD. The film has been released on Blu-ray Disc in the UK; however this disc is Region B locked and will not work in most American players. The Criterion Collection later rereleased Henry V and Richard III on Blu-ray with more special features beyond the trailer and essay that the original DVDs featured, while The Criterion Collection has not regained the rights to release Hamlet on Blu-ray with better picture and audio quality along with any new special features that could accompany such a release.


== See also ==
BFI Top 100 British films


== References ==


=== Bibliography ===
Cross, Brenda (Ed): The film HAMLET: a record of its production (Saturn Press • London • 1948)
Dent, Alan: Hamlet: the Film and the Play (World Film Publishing • London • 1948)
Tynan, Kenneth: He That Plays The King (Longmans • London • 1950)
Barker, Felix: The Oliviers (Hamish Hamilton • London • 1953) pp118–121&128-130 [1937 Hamlets] and pp253–264 [1947 Hamlet]
Vermilye, Jerry. (1978). The Great British Films. Citadel Press. pp. 113–116. ISBN 978-0-8065-0661-6
Manvell, Roger: Shakespeare and the Film (A. S. Barnes • London • 1979)
Barker, Felix: Laurence Olivier (Spellmount • Tunbridge Wells • 1984)
Trewin, J. C.: Five & Eighty Hamlets (Hutchinson • London • 1987)


== External links ==
Hamlet at IMDb 
Hamlet at the BFI's Screenonline
Hamlet at the TCM Movie Database
Hamlet at AllMovie
Hamlet at Rotten Tomatoes
Hamlet an essay by Terrence Rafferty at The Criterion Collection12 Years a Slave (film)
15-Minute Hamlet
1917 (2019 film)
1948 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
21st Academy Awards
2nd Bodil Awards
2nd British Academy Film Awards
6th Golden Globe Awards
71st Academy Awards
90th Academy Awards
9th Venice International Film Festival
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A City of Sadness
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Night to Remember (1958 film)
A Performance of Hamlet in the Village of Mrduša Donja
A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Year of the Quiet Sun
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Affe mit Schädel
Alan Dent
Alexander Korda
Alfie (1966 film)
Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)
All the Beauty and the Bloodshed
All the King's Men (1949 film)
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
Amleth
Amleto
An American in Paris (film)
Annie Hall
Anthony Quayle
Aparajito
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Artists Under the Big Top: Perplexed
As You Like It (1936 film)
Asterix and the Great Crossing
Atlantic City (1980 film)
Atonement (2007 film)
Au revoir les enfants
BAFTA
BAFTA Award for Best British Film
BAFTA Award for Best Film
BBC Television Shakespeare
BFI Top 100 British films
Ballad of a Soldier
Bambi Award
Basil Sydney
Before the Rain (1994 film)
Belle de Jour (film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Bicycle Thieves
Birdman (film)
Blu-ray
Bodil Award for Best Non-American Film
Born to Be King (Blackadder)
Boyhood (2014 film)
Braveheart
British Film Institute
Brokeback Mountain
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
CODA (2021 film)
Cabaret (1972 film)
Carmen Dillon
Casablanca (film)
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Characters in Hamlet
Chariots of Fire
Chicago (2002 film)
Christopher Lee
Cimarron (1931 film)
Close to Eden
Confessions of an Actor
Crash (2004 film)
Critical approaches to Hamlet
Cultural references to Hamlet
Cultural references to Ophelia
Cyclo (film)
Círculo de Escritores Cinematográficos
DVD
Damon and Pythias (play)
Dances with Wolves
Darling (1965 film)
Dating Hamlet
Day for Night (film)
Dead Poets Society
Deep focus
Desmond Dickinson
Die Hamletmaschine (opera)
Doctor (Doctor Who)
Doctor Syn
Doctor Who
Dogg's Hamlet, Cahoot's Macbeth
Doubt (2009 film)
Dr. Strangelove
Driving Miss Daisy
Dumbshow
Educating Rita (film)
Eileen Herlie
Electronovision
Elsinore
Elsinore (video game)
Elsinore Castle
Equity (trade union)
Esmond Knight
Everything Everywhere All at Once
F. J. McCormick
Family Diary
Fandango Media
Faust (2011 film)
Felix Aylmer
Felix Barker
Film noir
First Name: Carmen
Forbidden Games
Forrest Gump
Fortinbras
Fortinbras (play)
Four Weddings and a Funeral
Franco Zeffirelli
From Afar (film)
From Here to Eternity
Gandhi (film)
General Della Rovere
Gentleman's Agreement
German Expressionism
Gertrude (Hamlet)
Gertrude and Claudius
Gertrude – The Cry
Gervaise (film)
Ghost (Hamlet)
Gigi (1958 film)
Girl with Green Eyes
Gladiator (2000 film)
Gloria (1980 film)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best English-Language Foreign Film
Golden Lion
Golden Osella
Gone with the Wind (film)
Goodfellas
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Green Book (film)
HFPA
Haider (film)
Hallmark Hall of Fame
Hamlet
Hamlet's Father
Hamlet, Revenge!
Hamlet: The Drama of Vengeance
Hamlet (1900 film)
Hamlet (1907 film)
Hamlet (1908 film)
Hamlet (1912 film)
Hamlet (1913 film)
Hamlet (1917 film)
Hamlet (1954 film)
Hamlet (1959 film)
Hamlet (1961 film)
Hamlet (1964 film)
Hamlet (1969 film)
Hamlet (1974 film)
Hamlet (1990 film)
Hamlet (1996 film)
Hamlet (2000 film)
Hamlet (2009 film)
Hamlet (2011 film)
Hamlet (Dean)
Hamlet (Tchaikovsky)
Hamlet (Thomas)
Hamlet (video game)
Hamlet 2
Hamlet A.D.D.
Hamlet Goes Business
Hamlet Had an Uncle
Hamlet Q1
Hamlet and His Problems
Hamlet and Oedipus
Hamlet at Elsinore
Hamlet bibliographies
Hamlet in performance
Hamlet on screen
Hamletmachine
Hamnet (novel)
Hana-bi
Hands over the City
Happening (film)
Harcourt Williams
Hebenon
Helga Cranston
Hemanta (film)
Henry V (1944 film)
Highlander II: The Quickening
Horatio (Hamlet)
Horatio (character)
House of Gonzaga
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Howards End (film)
Human skull symbolism
I, Hamlet
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Hate Hamlet
In the Bleak Midwinter (film)
In the Heat of the Night (film)
Induction (play)
Interred with Their Bones
It Happened One Night
Ivan's Childhood
J.C. Trewin
J. C. Trewin
James Agee
Jean-Louis Barrault
Jean Simmons
Jean de Florette
Jill Esmond
Joan Plowright
John Gielgud
John Laurie
Johnny Hamlet
Joker (2019 film)
Julia (1977 film)
Justice Is Done
Karmayogi (2012 film)
Kenneth Branagh
Kenneth Tynan
Khoon Ka Khoon
King Claudius
King Hamlet
Kramer vs. Kramer
La La Land
La Ronde (1950 film)
Lacombe, Lucien
Laertes (Hamlet)
Laertes (character)
Language of flowers
Last Action Hero
Last Action Hero (video game)
Last Year at Marienbad
Laurence Olivier
Laurence Olivier Awards
Laurence Olivier Presents
Laurence Olivier Productions
Laurence Olivier on stage and screen
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Lebanon (film)
Let the Devil Wear Black
Life Is Beautiful
List of VeggieTales videos
List of awards and nominations received by Laurence Olivier
Literary influence of Hamlet
Lust, Caution
Macbeth (unfinished film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Manon (film)
Marianne and Juliane
Marty (film)
Mel Gibson
Michael Collins (film)
Midnight Cowboy
Million Dollar Baby
Milton Shulman
Monsoon Wedding
Moonlight (2016 film)
Mortal coil
Moscow Art Theatre production of Hamlet
Mrs. Miniver
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Robin is to the greenwood gone
My Week with Marilyn
National Board of Review
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Awards 1948
New York Film Critics Circle
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Director
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
Niall MacGinnis
Nicol Williamson
No Country for Old Men
Nomadland
Nomadland (film)
Norman Wooland
Not One Less
Oedipal
Oedipus complex
Oh! What a Lovely War
Old Vic
Old Vic Theatre
Oliver! (film)
On Acting
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
One Hamlet Less
Ophelia
Ophelia (2018 film)
Ophelia (Cabanel)
Ophelia (John William Waterhouse)
Ophelia (character)
Ophelia (painting)
Ophélia (1963 film)
Ordet
Ordinary People
Orson Welles
Ostalo je ćutanje
Out of Africa (film)
Parasite (2019 film)
Patrick Troughton
Patton (film)
Paul Czinner
Pauline Kael
Peter Cushing
Peter Glenville
Phrases from Hamlet in common English
Picturegoer
Pietà (film)
Platoon (film)
Polish Hamlet. Portrait of Aleksander Wielopolski
Polonius
Poor Murderer
Poor Things (film)
Prince Hamlet
Pull Me Under
Quiddity
Rain Man
Rank Organisation
Rashomon
Rebecca (1940 film)
Red Desert (film)
Renaissance Man (film)
Richard Burton
Richard Burton's Hamlet
Richard Chamberlain
Richard III (1955 film)
Rickshaw Man
Roberto Benigni
Rockabye Hamlet
Rocky
Roger K. Furse
Roger Manvell
Roma (2018 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1954 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1968 film)
Room at the Top (1959 film)
Rosencrantz & Guildenstern Are Dead (film)
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern (play)
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Undead
Rotten Tomatoes
Russell Thorndike
Sacro GRA
Sandra (1965 film)
Saxo Grammaticus
Schindler's List
Screenonline
Second Doctor
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Shakespeare: The Animated Tales
Shakespeare in Love
Sharpe's Havoc
Sheridan Morley
Short Cuts
Skinhead Hamlet
Slings & Arrows
Slumdog Millionaire
Something Rotten!
Something Rotten (Gratz)
Somewhere (film)
Song for Athene
Sons of Anarchy
Sources of Hamlet
Spartacus (1960 film)
Speak the speech
Spotlight (film)
Stage Blood
Stanley Holloway
Still Life (2006 film)
Strange Brew
Substitution (poetry)
Sunday Bloody Sunday (film)
Sybil Thorndike
Symphony No. 65 (Haydn)
Tales from the Public Domain
Tapestry
Terence Morgan
Terms of Endearment
Terrance and Phillip: Behind the Blow
Terrence Rafferty
The Angel of Vengeance – The Female Hamlet
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Bad Sleep Well
The Banquet (2006 film)
The Battle of Algiers
The Beggar's Opera (film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Chronicles of Amber
The Circle (2000 film)
The Commitments (film)
The Complete Works of William Shakespeare (Abridged)
The Conscience of the King
The Criterion Collection
The Dead Fathers Club
The Deer Hunter
The Departed
The Devil's Disciple (1959 film)
The Elephant Man (film)
The English Patient (film)
The Fox (1967 film)
The French Connection (film)
The Full Monty
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Graduate
The Gravediggers
The Great War (1959 film)
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Green Ray (film)
The Hobart Shakespeareans
The Hurt Locker
The Hustler
The Killing Fields (film)
The King's Speech
The Klingon Hamlet
The Last Emperor
The Legend of the Holy Drinker (film)
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion King
The Lion King (2019 film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Magdalene Sisters
The New York Times
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Prince and the Showgirl
The Producer
The Purple Rose of Cairo
The Queen (2006 film)
The Rest Is Silence (1959 film)
The Return (2003 film)
The Revenant (2015 film)
The River Bank (Ophelia)
The Seagull
The Shakespeare Stealer
The Shape of Water
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Sound Barrier
The Sound of Music (film)
The Southerner (film)
The Spanish Tragedy
The State of Things (film)
The Sting
The Story of Edgar Sawtelle
The Story of Qiu Ju
The Strike (1947 film)
The Trials of Oscar Wilde
The Undiscovered
The Wages of Fear
The Way We Laughed
The Woman Who Left
The Woman in the Hall
The Wrestler (2008 film)
The lady doth protest too much, methinks
Theatre Guild
Theatre Guild on the Air
Theatre of War (novel)
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Three Colours: Blue
Three Days (of Hamlet)
Three Sisters (1970 film)
Thy name is
Time (magazine)
Titanic (1997 film)
To Be or Not to Be (1942 film)
To Be or Not to Be (1983 film)
To Be or Not to Be (book)
To Be or Not to Be (play)
To be, or not to be
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tomorrow Is My Turn (film)
Tony Richardson
Too, Too Solid Flesh
Tristia (Berlioz)
Turner Classic Movies
Two Cities Films
Unforgiven
Ur-Hamlet
Vagabond (1985 film)
Venice Film Festival
Vera Drake
Vive L'Amour
Vivien Leigh
Volpi Cup for Best Actress
War (2002 film)
West Side Story (1961 film)
What a piece of work is a man
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (film)
William Shakespeare
William Walton
William Wyler
Wings (1927 film)
Woman in a Dressing Gown
Women in Love (film)
Yorick
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Young Winston
http://www.digitallyobsessed.com/showreview.php3?ID=721
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,779905-8,00.html
http://www.screenonline.org.uk/film/id/440240/
https://archive.org/stream/variety173-1949-01#page/n45/mode/1up
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/21342/Hamlet/awards
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v21342
https://archive.org/download/TheaterGuildontheAir/Tgoa_51-03-04_ep065-Hamlet.mp3
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0040416/
https://viaf.org/viaf/219965371
https://d-nb.info/gnd/7601935-4
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0036910/fullcredits/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1009123-hamlet
https://www.criterion.com/current/posts/85-hamlet
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14664090r
https://archive.org/details/Screen_Volume_32_Issue_3/page/n17
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14664090r
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27178#identifiers
https://web.archive.org/web/20120210202430/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/21342/Hamlet/awards
https://web.archive.org/web/20100402044709/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,779905-8,00.html
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1949
http://awards.bafta.org/award/1949/film
https://www.goldenglobes.com/film/hamlet
https://nationalboardofreview.org/award-years/1948/
https://www.nyfcc.com/awards/?awardyear=1948
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/28119/enwp
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no97038442
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27178#P345
