In Old Chicago
In Old Chicago is a 1938 American disaster musical drama film directed by Henry King.  The screenplay by Sonya Levien and Lamar Trotti was based on the Niven Busch story, "We the O'Learys".  The film is a fictionalized account about the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 and stars Alice Brady as Mrs. O'Leary, the owner of the cow which started the fire, and Tyrone Power and Don Ameche as her sons.  It also stars Alice Faye and Andy Devine. At the time of its release, it was one of the most expensive movies ever made.


== Plot ==
The O'Leary family are traveling to Chicago to start a new life when Patrick O'Leary tries to race a steam train in his wagon. He is killed when his wagon hits a bump and his horses break loose, dragging him. His wife Molly and their three boys are left to survive on their own. In town she agrees to prove her skills as a laundress when a woman's dress is accidentally spattered with mud. She quickly proves herself and builds a laundry business in an area known as "the Patch". Her sons are educated. One, Jack, becomes a reforming lawyer, but another, Dion, is involved in gambling. While washing a sheet, Mrs. O'Leary discovers a drawing, apparently created by Gil Warren, a devious local businessman. Her sons realize that it reveals that he has a plan to run a tramline along a street that he and his cronies intend to buy up cheaply.
Dion becomes enamored with a feisty saloon-bar singer, Belle, who works for Warren. After a stormy courtship they become lovers. Meanwhile, Bob, the youngest O'Leary son, who helps his mother, is in love with Gretchen, an innocent German girl. They meet in the barn watched by the O'Leary's cow Daisy and plan to marry. Mrs. O'Leary approves of the match, but expresses disdain for the loose-living Belle.
Dion and Belle bribe the local politicians to set up a saloon on the street where the tramline will pass. Dion makes a deal to support Warren's political career and carve up business in the town. However, Dion's dishonest practices lead to conflict with his brother Jack when one of Dion's cronies is arrested for multiple voting. Dion later decides to support his brother rather than Warren in the election, convinced he can cut out Warren altogether and reign-in Jack's reformist zeal. He is increasingly attracted by the daughter of the corrupt local senator, leading to conflicts with Belle. Bob and Gretchen marry and have a baby.
At a Warren election rally a fight breaks out, arranged by Dion. All Warren's election workers are arrested. Jack is elected mayor. He soon announces a campaign against corruption, targeting his brother's fiefdom in the Patch, which he intends to demolish. Belle and Dion separate when Jack asks her to support him. When he realizes Belle might testify against him, Dion asks her to marry him, making her testimony inadmissible. As mayor, Jack marries the couple, but knocks Dion out in a fist fight as soon he realizes he has been deceived.
Mrs. O'Leary is told about the fight while helping Daisy's calf to suckle. In her distress, she leaves a lamp in the barn, and Daisy knocks it over. A fire breaks out. Soon the whole of the Patch is on fire. Dion, Warren and their cronies are convinced that Jack has set the fire. Warren's men look for Jack, seeking revenge. Advised by Philip Sheridan, Jack plans to create a firebreak by dynamiting buildings to stop the fire reaching the gasworks, but Warren's gang try to stop him. When Dion learns from Bob how the fire really started, he rushes to Jack's aid. In the struggle, Jack and Dion fight off the gang and set off the dynamite, but Jack is shot by one of Warren's thugs and then killed by a falling building. Warren attempts to flee but is trampled to death by stampeding cattle from the stockyards.
Dion and Bob help to save Gretchen and the baby, while Belle rescues Mrs O'Leary. They all manage to escape to the river. Belle and Dion are reconciled, and Mrs. O'Leary predicts that the city will be rebuilt and flourish after her son's sacrifice for its future.


== Cast ==
Tyrone Power as Dion O'Leary
Alice Faye as Belle Fawcett
Don Ameche as Jack O'Leary
Alice Brady as Mrs. Molly O'Leary
Phyllis Brooks as Ann Colby
Andy Devine as Pickle Bixby
Brian Donlevy as Gil Warren
Tom Brown as Bob O'Leary
Berton Churchill as Senator Colby
Sidney Blackmer as General Phil Sheridan
J. Anthony Hughes  (de) as  Patrick O'Leary
Paul Hurst as 'Mitch' Mitchell
June Storey as Gretchen O'Leary
Gene Reynolds as Young Dion
Eddie Collins as Drunk
Billy Watson as Young Jack
Spencer Charters as Commissioner W.J. Beavers
Rondo Hatton as Rondo
Charles Lane as Booking Agent
Francis Ford as Driver
Gustav von Seyffertitz as Dutch
Russell Hicks as Politician
Scotty Mattraw as Beef King
Larry Steers as Belle's Admirer (uncredited)
Harry Tenbrook as Hub Patron (uncredited)


== Production ==
During pre-production, MGM had announced that Jean Harlow, who was under contract to that studio, would be loaned to 20th Century Fox to star in the role Belle Fawcett. However, due to Harlow's untimely death, the part went to Alice Faye. Faye's popularity skyrocketed as a result of the picture, and she was reunited with Power and Ameche that same year for Alexander's Ragtime Band, which proved to be even more successful.Some sources claim that MGM offered to loan both Harlow and Clark Gable to Fox for In Old Chicago if they reciprocated by loaning Shirley Temple to MGM for their upcoming production of The Wizard of Oz. However, this is merely a rumor, as Harlow died in June 1937, several months before MGM had even purchased the rights to Oz. The railroad scenes were filmed on the Sierra Railroad in Tuolumne County, California.


== Awards ==
The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. Alice Brady won the Oscar for Best Actress in a Supporting Role. She was the first person to win the Supporting Oscar after being nominated in the prior year. The film was also nominated in the categories of Music (Scoring), Sound Recording (E. H. Hansen), and Writing (Original Story), and won for Assistant Director (Robert D. Webb).


== Historical accuracy ==
Despite crediting the Chicago Historical Society for assistance with historical research, much of the film is fictionalized. The area known as "the Patch" did exist as a predominantly Irish neighbourhood, and was associated with crime, as portrayed in the film. In the years before the film was made it had been supplanted by the Levee, an area renowned for its corrupt politicians, known as the Gray Wolves, whose deeds resemble those of the characters in the film.The portrayal of the O'Leary family is largely fictitious down to the names of the characters. Mrs. O'Leary's name was Catherine, not Molly. The O'Learys had two children, one son and one daughter. In the movie there are three sons. Her only son was named James Patrick O'Leary. The daughter was named Anna. Their father Patrick O'Leary did not die in 1854 as a result of an accident involving his horses. He died in 1894. Mrs. O'Leary did not run her own "French Laundry" out of their house.
The Mayor of Chicago in 1871 was Roswell B. Mason, not an O'Leary son. However, Mason was elected on a reform ticket like the fictional Jack and took similar measures to deal with the fire. Mrs. O'Leary's son James Patrick did achieve success as a gambler and saloon owner comparable to that of Dion in the film.


== Trivia ==
Scotty Mattraw and Eddie Collins both worked as voice actors in Walt Disney's first animated feature Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs the previous year, with Mattraw voicing Bashful and Collins voicing Dopey.


== Home media ==
The film was released and restored to its full length on DVD in 2005.


== See also ==
List of firefighting films


== References ==


== External links ==
In Old Chicago at the American Film Institute Catalog
In Old Chicago at Rotten Tomatoes
In Old Chicago at IMDb 
In Old Chicago at AllMovie
In Old Chicago at the TCM Movie Database20,000 Years in Sing Sing
20th Century Fox
23 1/2 Hours' Leave
42nd Street (film)
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Bell for Adano
A Broadway Butterfly
A Fugitive from Matrimony
A Game of Wits
A Message to Garcia (film)
A Sporting Chance (1919 Pathe film)
A Yank in the R.A.F.
Academy Award for Best Assistant Director
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Story
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Across the Pacific (1926 film)
Alexander's Ragtime Band (film)
Alice Brady
Alice Faye
AllMovie
All About Eve
All the World to Nothing
Always Goodbye (1938 film)
Andy Devine
Any Woman
Baby Face (film)
Barbara McLean
Beauty and the Rogue
Beloved Infidel
Berton Churchill
Billy Watson (actor)
Blood Money (1933 film)
Blood and Sand (1941 film)
Born to Be Bad (1934 film)
Brass Buttons
Brian Donlevy
Brigham Young (film)
Bulldog Drummond Strikes Back (1934 film)
Call of the Wild (1935 film)
Captain from Castile
Cardinal Richelieu (film)
Carolina (1934 film)
Carousel (film)
Catherine O'Leary
Chad Hanna
Charles Lane (actor, born 1905)
Chicago History Museum
China Girl (1942 film)
Clark Gable
Crack in the Mirror
Darryl F. Zanuck
David and Bathsheba (film)
Dean Zanuck
Deep Waters (1948 film)
Dice of Destiny
Disaster
Doctor X (film)
Don Ameche
Down Argentine Way
Drama film
Dynamite
E. H. Hansen
Eddie Collins (actor)
Ex-Lady
Find Your Man
Folies Bergère de Paris
Footloose Widows
Francis Ford (actor)
Fury (1923 film)
Fury at Furnace Creek
G Men
Gene Reynolds
Gentleman's Agreement
Good Time Charley
Gray Wolves (Chicago)
Great Chicago Fire
Gustav von Seyffertitz
Happy Landing (1938 film)
Hardboiled Rose
Harry Tenbrook
Haunting Shadows
Hearts or Diamonds?
Hell Harbor
Help Wanted – Male
Henry King (director)
Hobbs in a Hurry
Hogan's Alley (film)
Hollywood Cavalcade
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Hudson's Bay (film)
I'd Climb the Highest Mountain
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
I Loved You Wednesday
Illicit (film)
International Settlement (film)
Island in the Sun (film)
It Had to Happen
J. Peverell Marley
James Patrick O'Leary
Jean Harlow
Jesse James (1939 film)
John Fricke
Joy and the Dragon
June Storey
Just Around the Corner (1938 film)
Kenneth Macgowan
Kentucky Moonshine
King of the Khyber Rifles (film)
Lady Killer (1933 film)
Lamar Trotti
Lancer Spy
Larry Steers
Les Misérables (1935 film)
Lew Pollack
Life Begins (1932 film)
Lightnin' (1930 film)
List of firefighting films
Little Caesar (film)
Little Mary Sunshine (1916 film)
Little Miss Broadway
Little Old New York (1940 film)
Lloyd's of London (film)
Looking for Trouble (1934 film)
Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing (film)
Madonna of Avenue A
Margie (1946 film)
Marie Galante (film)
Maryland (1940 film)
Maybe It's Love (1930 film)
Merely Mary Ann
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Metropolitan (1935 film)
Moulin Rouge (1934 film)
Musical film
My Lucky Star (1938 film)
My Man (1928 film)
Niven Busch
No Way Out (1950 film)
Noah's Ark (1928 film)
O. Henry's Full House
Old San Francisco
One Hour Before Dawn
One More Spring
Over the Hill (1931 film)
Parachute Jumper
Partners Again
Paul Hurst (actor)
Pay Dirt
People Will Talk
Philip Sheridan
Phillip Sheridan
Phyllis Brooks
Pigskin Parade
Pinky (film)
Poor Little Rich Girl (1936 film)
Powers That Prey
Prince of Foxes (film)
Professional Soldier
Ramona (1936 film)
Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm (1938 film)
Red Hot Tires (1925 film)
Remember the Day
Richard D. Zanuck
Rin Tin Tin
Robert D. Webb
Romola (film)
Rondo Hatton
Rose of Washington Square
Roswell B. Mason
Rotten Tomatoes
Russell Hicks
Sackcloth and Scarlet
Salvage (1921 film)
Sanctuary (1961 film)
Say It with Songs
Scotty Mattraw
Seventh Heaven (1937 film)
Sex Hygiene
Shadows and Sunshine
She Goes to War
Shirley Temple
Should a Wife Forgive?
Sidney Blackmer
Sidney Clare
Sierra Railroad
Sing, Baby, Sing
Six Feet Four
Slave Ship (1937 film)
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)
Social Briars
Some Liar
Son of Fury: The Story of Benjamin Blake
Sonny (1922 film)
Sonya Levien
Souls in Pawn (1917 film)
Southern Pride (film)
Spencer Charters
Stanley and Livingstone
State Fair (1933 film)
State Street Sadie
Stella Dallas (1925 film)
Submarine Patrol
Sunshine and Gold
Swanee River (1939 film)
Tail Spin
Ten Gentlemen from West Point
Tender Is the Night (film)
Tenderloin (film)
Thanks a Million
The Better 'Ole (1926 film)
The Big Gamble (1961 film)
The Black Swan (film)
The Bond Boy
The Bowery (film)
The Bravados
The Bride's Silence
The Cabin in the Cotton
The Caveman (1926 film)
The Chapman Report
The Climber (1917 film)
The Country Doctor (1936 film)
The Dark Horse (1932 film)
The Desired Woman
The Doorway to Hell
The Egyptian (film)
The Eyes of the World (1930 film)
The First Auto
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great American Broadcast
The Great Profile
The Gunfighter
The Jazz Singer
The Levee
The Life of the Party (1930 film)
The Lighthouse by the Sea
The Little Irish Girl
The Little Princess (1939 film)
The Locked Heart
The Longest Day (film)
The Magic Flame
The Man I Married
The Man Who Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo (film)
The Man Who Played God (1932 film)
The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit
The Mark of Zorro (1940 film)
The Mate of the Sally Ann
The Midnight Taxi
The Mighty Barnum
The Mistress of Shenstone
The Prisoner of Shark Island
The Public Enemy
The Purple Heart
The Rains Came
The Razor's Edge (1946 film)
The Return of Frank James
The Rich Are Always with Us
The Road to Glory
The Roots of Heaven (film)
The Seventh Day (1922 film)
The Show of Shows
The Snake Pit
The Snows of Kilimanjaro (1952 film)
The Social Highwayman
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sting of the Lash
The Story of Alexander Graham Bell
The Sun Also Rises (1957 film)
The View from Pompey's Head
The Visit (1964 film)
The White Dove (1920 film)
The White Sister (1923 film)
The Winning of Barbara Worth
The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)
The Woman Disputed
The Woman in Room 13 (1932 film)
The Working Man
Thin Ice (1937 film)
This Above All (film)
This Earth Is Mine (1959 film)
This Hero Stuff
This Is My Affair
Three Faces East (1930 film)
Three Weeks in Paris
Three on a Match
Thunder Birds (1942 film)
To the Shores of Tripoli
Tobacco Road (film)
Tol'able David
Told at Twilight
Tom Brown (actor)
Tracked by the Police
Tuolumne County, California
Turner Classic Movies
Twelve O'Clock High
Twin Kiddies
Tyrone Power
Uncharted Channels
Under Two Flags (1936 film)
Untamed (1955 film)
Up Romance Road
Variety (magazine)
Vengeance of the Dead
Virginia Fox
Viva Zapata!
Wait till the Sun Shines, Nellie (film)
Wake Up and Live
Walt Disney
Warner Books
Way Down East (1935 film)
Wee Willie Winkie (film)
West Town, Chicago
When We Were 21
When a Man Rides Alone (1919 film)
Where the West Begins (1919 film)
Wife, Husband and Friend
William Targ
Wilson (1944 film)
Winged Victory (film)
http://graveyards.com/IL/Cook/mtolivet/oleary.html
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1938
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v79100
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0029047/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/984
https://archive.org/details/wizardofozoffici0000fric
https://archive.org/details/wizardofozoffici0000fric/page/20
https://archive.org/details/hollywoodbeautie00pari/page/232
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/in_old_chicago
https://www.behindthevoiceactors.com/movies/Snow-White-and-the-Seven-Dwarfs/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/53021/enwp
https://books.google.com/books?id=c-RNswEACAAJ&q=Hollywood's+Railroads
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0042-2738
https://archive.org/details/variety133-1939-01/page/n9/mode/1up?q=%E2%80%9CCosting%E2%80%9D
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1619866#P345
