Julia (1977 film)
Julia is a 1977 American WWII drama film directed by Fred Zinnemann, from a screenplay by Alvin Sargent. It is based on a chapter from Lillian Hellman's 1973 book Pentimento about the author's relationship with a lifelong friend, Julia, who fought against the Nazis in the years prior to World War II. The film stars Jane Fonda, Vanessa Redgrave, Jason Robards, Hal Holbrook, Rosemary Murphy, Maximilian Schell, and Meryl Streep in her film debut.
Julia was released theatrically on October 2, 1977 by 20th Century Fox. The film received generally positive reviews from critics and grossed $20.7 million against its $7 million budget. It received a leading 11 nominations at the 50th Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and won three awards: Best Supporting Actor (for Robards), Best Supporting Actress (for Redgrave) and Best Adapted Screenplay. 
At the 35th Golden Globe Awards it received a leading seven nominations, including for the Best Motion Picture – Drama, with Fonda and Redgrave winning for Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress, respectively. The film also received a leading ten nominations at the 32nd British Academy Film Awards and won four: Best Film, Best Actress (for Fonda), Best Screenplay, and Best Cinematography.


== Plot ==
The young Lillian Hellman and her friend Julia, daughter of a wealthy family being brought up by her grandparents in the United States, enjoy a childhood together and a very close friendship in late adolescence. Later, while medical student Julia attends the University of Oxford and the University of Vienna and studies with such luminaries as Sigmund Freud,  Lillian, a struggling writer, suffers through revisions of her play with her mentor and lover, famed author Dashiell Hammett, at a beach house.
Julia's university in Vienna is overrun by Nazi thugs, and she is severely injured trying to protect others.  Lillian receives word of Julia's condition and rushes to Vienna to be with her.  Julia is taken away for "treatment", and Lillian is unable to find her again since the hospital denies any knowledge of her being treated there.  She remains in Europe to try to find Julia, but is unsuccessful.
Later, during the Nazi era, Lillian has become a celebrated playwright and is invited to a writers' conference in the USSR. Julia, having taken on the battle against Nazism, enlists Lillian en route to smuggle money into Germany to assist the anti-Nazi cause. It is a dangerous mission, especially for a Jewish intellectual on her way to Russia.
Lillian departs for the USSR via Berlin, and the movements of her person, and the placement of her possessions (a hat and a box of candy), are carefully guided by colleagues of Julia through border crossings and inspections. In Berlin, Lillian is told to go to a cafe, where she finds Julia. They are able to speak only briefly. Julia divulges that the "treatment" she received in the hospital in Vienna was the amputation of her leg.  Julia tells her that the money she has brought will save 500 to 1,000 people, many of them Jews. Lillian also learns that Julia has a daughter, Lily, who is living with a baker in Alsace. After Lilian leaves Julia in the cafe and boards the train to Moscow, a man tells her to avoid passing through Germany again after she leaves the USSR.
When Lillian reaches Moscow, the atmosphere is gloomy and oppressive. She receives word that Julia is dead. Returning to London, she is told that Julia has been killed in the Frankfurt apartment of a friend by Nazi agents, although the details of her death are shrouded in secrecy. Lillian unsuccessfully looks for Julia's daughter in Alsace. She returns to the United States and is reunited with Dashiell Hammett.  She is haunted by memories of Julia and is distraught at not finding Julia's baby. She is shocked that Julia's family pretends not to remember Lillian as Julia's friend, clearly wanting to excise from their memory a granddaughter who refused to conform.
The film ends with an image of Lillian Hellman many years later seated in a boat alone, fishing.  She reveals in voiceover that she continued to live with Hammett for another thirty years and outlived him.


== Cast ==

The film marked the film debut of Meryl Streep and Lisa Pelikan.


== Production ==
The film was shot on location in England and France. Although Lillian Hellman claimed the story was based on true events that occurred early in her life, the filmmakers later came to believe that most of it was fictionalized. Director Fred Zinnemann would later comment, "Lillian Hellman in her own mind owned half the Spanish Civil War, while Hemingway owned the other half. She would portray herself in situations that were not true. An extremely talented, brilliant writer, but she was a phony character, I'm sorry to say. My relations with her were very guarded and ended in pure hatred."The 1977 film Julia was based on the "Julia" chapter of Hellman's memoir Pentimento. On June 30, 1976, as the film was going into production, Hellman wrote about the screenplay to its producer:
This is not a work of fiction and certain laws have to be followed for that reason ... Your major difficulty to me is the treatment of Lillian as the leading character. The reason is simple: no matter what she does in this story–and I do not deny the danger I was in when I took the money into Germany–my role was passive. And nobody and nothing can change that unless you write a fictional and different story ... Isn't it necessary to know that I am a Jew? That, of course, is what mainly made the danger.
In a 1979 television interview with Dick Cavett, author Mary McCarthy, long Hellman's political adversary and the object of her negative literary judgment, said of Hellman that "every word she writes is a lie, including 'and' and 'the'." Hellman responded by filing a US$2,500,000 defamation suit against McCarthy, interviewer Dick Cavett, and PBS. McCarthy produced evidence she said proved that Hellman had lied in some accounts of her life. Cavett said he sympathized more with McCarthy than Hellman in the lawsuit, but "everybody lost" as a result of it. Norman Mailer attempted unsuccessfully to mediate the dispute through an open letter he published in the New York Times. At the time of her death in 1984, Hellman was still in litigation with McCarthy; her executors dropped the suit.In 1983, New York psychiatrist Muriel Gardiner had become involved in the libel suit between McCarthy and Hellman. She claimed to be the model for the character named Julia in Pentimento, and in the movie Julia based on a chapter of that book. Hellman, who never met Gardiner, said that "Julia" was somebody else.Gardiner wrote that, while she never met Hellman, she had often heard about her from her friend Wolf Schwabacher, who was Hellman's lawyer. By Gardiner's account, Schwabacher had visited Gardiner in Vienna. After Muriel Gardiner and Joseph Buttinger moved into their house at Brookdale Farm in Pennington, New Jersey in 1940, they divided the house in two. They rented half of it to Wolf and Ethel Schwabacher for more than ten years.Many people believe that Hellmann based her story on Gardiner's life. Gardiner's editor cited the unlikelihood that there were two millionaire American women who were medical students in Vienna in the late 1930s.


== Reception ==
The film earned $7.5 million in North American rentals.It holds a 74% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 31 reviews.The response varied from positive to mixed, usually praising the period setting and acting, but criticizing the script and failure to adequately portray the friendship between the two leads. Variety gave it a positive review, praising Jane Fonda and Vanessa Redgrave as being "dynamite together on the screen", Richard Roth's production as "handsome and tasteful", as well as the period costumes and production design.Roger Ebert called the film a "fascinating story", but felt the movie suffered from being told by Lillian Hellman's point of view. "The film never really establishes a relationship between the two women," he wrote. "It's awkward, the way the movie has to suspend itself between Julia – its ostensible subject – and Lillian Hellman, its real subject." He gave it two and a half out of four stars.John Simon said of Julia- "Very little of what happens in the film is intrinsically interesting".TV Guide gave it three out of five stars and declared it "Beautifully crafted, nominated for eleven Academy Awards, a big hit at the box office--and a dramatic dud ... If you like red nail polish, faux-cynicism, painfully brave smiles and European train stations, Julia may be your kind of cocktail."


== Awards and nominations ==
After Redgrave was nominated for Best Supporting Actress, the Jewish Defense League objected to her nomination because she had narrated and helped fund a documentary entitled The Palestinian, which supported a Palestinian state. They also picketed the Oscar ceremony.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Julia at IMDb
Julia at AllMovie
Julia at the TCM Movie Database
Julia at the American Film Institute Catalog
Julia at Box Office Mojo
Julia at Rotten Tomatoes12 Years a Slave (film)
1917 (2019 film)
1977 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards
1977 National Society of Film Critics Awards
1977 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
20th Century Fox
30th Directors Guild of America Awards
30th Writers Guild of America Awards
32nd British Academy Film Awards
35th Golden Globe Awards
4th César Awards
50th Academy Awards
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Hatful of Rain
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Act of Violence
After the Thin Man
Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)
Alsace
Alvin Sargent
American Beauty (1999 film)
Annie Hall
Another Thin Man
Anthea Sylbert
Anti-Nazi
Argo (2012 film)
Atonement (2007 film)
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role
BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role
BAFTA Award for Best Cinematography
BAFTA Award for Best Costume Design
BAFTA Award for Best Direction
BAFTA Award for Best Editing
BAFTA Award for Best Film
BAFTA Award for Best Original Music
BAFTA Award for Best Production Design
BAFTA Award for Best Screenplay
Ballad of a Soldier
Behold a Pale Horse (film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Benjy (film)
Bicycle Thieves
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
British Society of Cinematographers
Brokeback Mountain
Brookdale Farm (Pennington, New Jersey)
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
Cabaret (1972 film)
Carmen Dillon
Cathleen Nesbitt
Chariots of Fire
City Streets (1931 film)
César Award for Best Foreign Film
Dash and Lilly
Dashiell Hammett
David di Donatello
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Actress
Day for Night (film)
Dead Poets Society
Dick Cavett
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Dora Doll
Dorothy Parker
Douglas Slocombe
Dr. Strangelove
Drama (film and television)
Educating Rita (film)
Ernest Hemingway
Ethel Schwabacher
Eyes in the Night
Film poster
Five Days One Summer
Forbidden Games
Forbidden Passage
Four Weddings and a Funeral
Fred Zinnemann
From Here to Eternity
Gandhi (film)
Gene Callahan (production designer)
Georges Delerue
Gervaise (film)
Gladiator (2000 film)
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture
Goodfellas
Gérard Buhr
Hal Holbrook
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hammett (film)
High Noon
Howards End (film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
Jane Fonda
Jason Robards
Jean de Florette
Jewish Defense League
Joan Bridge
John Glover (actor)
John Simon (critic)
Julia (2022 TV series)
Julia and Julia
Julie & Julia
Kid Glove Killer
La La Land
La Ronde (1950 film)
Lacombe, Lucien
Lambert Wilson
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Lillian Hellman
Lisa Pelikan
Little Mister Jim
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Cinematography
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actress
Madame Rosa
Manhattan (1979 film)
Mary McCarthy (author)
Maurice Denham
Maximilian Schell
Meryl Streep
Midnight Cowboy
Muriel Gardiner
My Brother Talks to Horses
My Fair Lady (film)
Nastro d'Argento
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Awards 1977
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actor
Nazi Germany
Nazism
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actor
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress
Nick and Nora Charles
No Good Deed (2002 film)
Nomadland
Norman Mailer
Oklahoma! (1955 film)
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Pennington, New Jersey
Pentimento (book)
Public Broadcasting Service
Red Harvest
Redes (film)
Richard Amsel
Richard III (1955 film)
Roadhouse Nights
Roger Ebert
Roma (2018 film)
Room at the Top (1959 film)
Rosemary Murphy
Rotten Tomatoes
Sam Spade
Satan Met a Lady
Schindler's List
Secret Agent X-9
Secret Agent X-9 (1937 serial)
Secret Agent X-9 (1945 serial)
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Shadow of the Thin Man
Shakespeare in Love
Sigmund Freud
Simone Signoret
Slumdog Millionaire
Song of the Thin Man
Soviet Union
Stuffie (film)
Sunday Bloody Sunday (film)
TV Guide
Teresa (1951 film)
That Mothers Might Live
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Commitments (film)
The Continental Op
The Dain Curse
The Day of the Jackal (film)
The Elephant Man (film)
The English Patient (film)
The Full Monty
The Glass Key
The Glass Key (1935 film)
The Glass Key (1942 film)
The Graduate
The Hurt Locker
The Hustler
The Killing Fields (film)
The King's Speech
The Last Emperor
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Maltese Falcon (1931 film)
The Maltese Falcon (1941 film)
The Maltese Falcon (novel)
The Member of the Wedding (film)
The Men (1950 film)
The Nun's Story (film)
The Palestinian
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Purple Rose of Cairo
The Queen (2006 film)
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Search
The Seventh Cross (film)
The Sound Barrier
The Sundowners (1960 film)
The Thin Man
The Thin Man (film)
The Thin Man Goes Home
The Wages of Fear
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Turner Classic Movies
University of Oxford
University of Vienna
Vanessa Redgrave
WWII
Walter Murch
Watch on the Rhine
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (film)
Willy Holt
Wolf Schwabacher
Woman in the Dark (1934 film)
World War II
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=julia.htm
http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/ampas_awards/DisplayMain.jsp?curTime=1392734629247
https://www.nytimes.com/books/first/k/kiernan-mary.html
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/julia1977/
http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/julia-1977
http://www.tvguide.com/movies/julia/review/102928
http://abc7.com/archive/8545580/
https://www.nytimes.com/1983/04/29/books/publishing-new-memoir-stirs-julia-controversy.html
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v26714
https://variety.com/1976/film/reviews/julia-1200423977/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076245/
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1980/05/11/112888361.pdf
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/55905
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=julia.htm
https://archive.org/details/reverseangledeca0000simo
https://archive.org/details/reverseangledeca0000simo/page/338
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/julia1977
https://books.google.com/books?id=SiK_3d6a7DQC&q=zinnemann+%22ended+in+pure+hatred%22&pg=PA156
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/79965/enwp
https://archive.today/20140219045633/http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/ampas_awards/DisplayMain.jsp?curTime=1392734629247
