Marty (film)
Marty is a 1955 American romantic drama film directed by Delbert Mann in his directorial debut. The screenplay was written by Paddy Chayefsky, expanding upon his 1953 teleplay of the same name, which was broadcast on The Philco-Goodyear Television Playhouse and starred Rod Steiger in the title role.The film stars Ernest Borgnine, who won a Best Actor Oscar for his performance, and Betsy Blair. In addition to also winning the Academy Award for Best Picture, the film enjoyed international success, becoming the fourth American film to win the Palme d'Or. Marty, The Lost Weekend (1945) and Parasite (2019) are the only three films to win both organizations' grand prizes.
In 1994, Marty was deemed "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant" and selected for preservation in the Library of Congress' National Film Registry.


== Plot ==
Marty Piletti is an Italian-American butcher who lives in The Bronx with his mother. Unmarried at 34, the good-natured but socially awkward Marty faces constant badgering from family and friends to settle down, as they point out that all his brothers and sisters are already married, most of them with children. Not averse to marriage but disheartened by his lack of prospects, Marty has reluctantly resigned himself to bachelorhood.
After being harassed by his mother into going to the Stardust Ballroom one Saturday night, Marty connects with Clara, a plain high school science teacher, who is weeping outside on the roof after being abandoned by her blind date. Marty and Clara spend the evening together dancing, walking the busy streets, and talking in a diner. Marty eagerly spills out his life story and ambitions, and they encourage each other. He takes Clara to his house where he awkwardly tries to kiss her and is rebuffed. Clara then explains that she just didn't know how to handle the situation, and she does like him. At this point, Marty's  mother returns.
Marty takes Clara home by bus, promising to call her at 2:30 the next afternoon, after Mass. Overjoyed on his way back home, he punches the bus stop sign and weaves between the cars, looking for a cab instead.
Meanwhile, Marty's Aunt Catherine moves in to live with Marty and his mother. She warns his mother that Marty will soon marry and cast her aside. Fearing that Marty's new romance could spell her abandonment, his mother belittles Clara. Marty's friends, with an undercurrent of envy, deride Clara for her plainness and try to convince him to forget her and to remain with them, unmarried, in their fading youth. Harangued into submission by the pull of his friends, Marty fails to call Clara.
That night, back in the same lonely rut, Marty realizes that he is giving up a woman whom he not only likes, but who makes him happy. Over the objections of his friends, he dashes to a phone booth to call Clara, who is disconsolately watching television with her parents. When his friend asks what he's doing, Marty bursts out saying:

You don't like her, my mother don't like her, she's a dog and I'm a fat, ugly man! Well, all I know is I had a good time last night! I'm gonna have a good time tonight! If we have enough good times together, I'm gonna get down on my knees and I'm gonna beg that girl to marry me! If we make a party on New Year's, I got a date for that party. You don't like her? That's too bad!
Marty closes the phone booth door when Clara answers the phone. In the last line of the film, he says "Hello...Hello, Clara?"


== Cast ==
Ernest Borgnine as Marty Piletti
Betsy Blair as Clara Snyder
Esther Minciotti as Mrs. Teresa Piletti, Marty's mother
Augusta Ciolli as Aunt Catherine, Mrs. Piletti's sister
Joe Mantell as Angie, Marty's best friend
Karen Steele as Virginia, Aunt Catherine's daughter-in-law
Jerry Paris as Tommy, Aunt Catherine's son
Frank Sutton as Ralph (uncredited)


== Production ==
For the film, Esther Minciotti, Augusta Ciolli and Joe Mantell reprised their roles from the live television production. The screenplay changed the name of the Waverly Ballroom to the Stardust Ballroom. The film expanded the role of Clara, and added subplots about Marty's career, his mother, and her sister.Rod Steiger, who had played Marty in the teleplay, initially declined an offer to reprise the role after Harold Hecht and Burt Lancaster, the film's producers, demanded Steiger sign a multiple-picture commitment as a condition of retaining his role. Ernest Borgnine assumed the title role in Steiger's stead.
Shooting for the film began on September 7, 1954, in The Bronx and included many aspects of the borough into the film, such as Grand Concourse, Arthur Avenue, Gun Hill Road, White Plains Road, and several Bronx subway and elevated train lines, including the Concourse, Third Avenue, White Plains Road, and Jerome Avenue lines. On-set filming took place at Samuel Goldwyn Studios on November 1, 1954. Bronx native Jerry Orbach made his film debut in an uncredited role as a ballroom patron. Chayefsky had an uncredited cameo as Leo.
The role of Clara initially was going to be reprised by actress Nancy Marchand, later of Lou Grant and The Sopranos fame, who had portrayed the character in the television version. However, actress Betsy Blair was interested in playing the role and lobbied for it. At the time, Blair, who was married to actor Gene Kelly, had been blacklisted due to her Marxist and Communist sympathies. It was only through the lobbying of Kelly, who used his major star status and connections at MGM to pressure United Artists, that Blair got the role. Reportedly, Kelly threatened to withdraw from the film It's Always Fair Weather if Blair did not get the role of Clara.Mann shot the film in 16 days and an additional three days for retakes.


== Reception ==
Upon its premiere on April 11, 1955 (followed by a wide release on July 15), Marty received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics. Ronald Holloway of Variety wrote "If Marty is an example of the type of material that can be gleaned, then studio story editors better spend more time at home looking at television." Time described the film as "wonderful". Louella Parsons enjoyed the film, but she felt that it would not likely be nominated for Oscars. At a budget of $343,000, the film generated revenues of $3 million in the U.S., making it a box-office success.Rotten Tomatoes gives it a "Certified Fresh" 96% rating based on 77 reviews, with an average rating of 8.1/10. The site's consensus reads: "Scriptwriter Paddy Chayefsky's solid dialogue is bolstered by strong performances from Ernest Borgnine and Betsy Blair in this appealingly low-key character study."The film is recognized by the American Film Institute.

2002: AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Passions – 64


== Awards and nominations ==
Marty received the first Palme d'Or ever awarded. Marty, The Lost Weekend and Parasite are the only films ever to win both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the highest award at the Cannes Film Festival (Marty and Parasite both received the Palme d'Or, which, beginning at the 1955 festival, replaced the Grand Prix du Festival International du Film as the highest award). Marty is the shortest film ever to win Best Picture, at only 90 minutes.


== See also ==
List of American films of 1955


== References ==


== External links ==

Marty at IMDb
Marty at the TCM Movie Database
Marty at AllMovie
Marty at the American Film Institute Catalog
Marty at Rotten Tomatoes12 Years a Slave (film)
13th Golden Globe Awards
1955 Cannes Film Festival
1955 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
28th Academy Awards
4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days
8th Directors Guild of America Awards
8th Writers Guild of America Awards
9th British Academy Film Awards
A.S.C.
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Passions
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Death in California
A Gathering of Eagles
A Girl Named Sooner
A Man and a Woman
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Most Violent Year
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Against Her Will: An Incident in Baltimore
Alan Crosland, Jr.
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All Quiet on the Western Front (1979 film)
All That Jazz (film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
All the Way Home (1981 film)
Altered States
Amadeus (film)
Amarcord
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Film Institute
American Hustle
Amour (2012 film)
An American in Paris (film)
Anatomy of a Fall
Annie Hall
Antoine and Antoinette
Apache (film)
Apocalypse Now
April Morning (film)
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arthur Avenue
As Young as You Feel
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role
BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role
BAFTA Award for Best Film
Barry Lyndon
Barton Fink
Becket (1964 film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Best Actor Oscar
Betrayal (1983 film)
Betsy Blair
Bicycle Thieves
Birch Interval
Birdman (film)
Birdman of Alcatraz (film)
Black Orpheus
Blowup
Blue Is the Warmest Colour
Bodil Award for Best American Film
Bodil Awards
Boyhood (2014 film)
Braveheart
Breaking Up (1978 film)
Brief Encounter
Broadcast News (film)
Brokeback Mountain
Brontë (film)
Bryna Productions
Brynaprod
Burt Lancaster
Burt Lancaster filmography
CBS Playhouse
CODA (2021 film)
Cabaret (1972 film)
Calyork Music
Calyork Records
Cannes Film Festival
Carol (film)
Casablanca (film)
Catch My Boy On Sunday
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Chariots of Fire
Chicago (2002 film)
Chronicle of the Years of Fire
Cimarron (1931 film)
Citizen Kane
Clifton Productions
Colby Music
Columbia Pictures
Communism
Confessions of a Nazi Spy
Crash (2004 film)
Cries and Whispers
Crossfire (film)
Cry Tough (film)
Crystal Globe (Karlovy Vary International Film Festival)
Curtleigh Productions
Da 5 Bloods
Dancer in the Dark
Dances with Wolves
Darling (1965 film)
David Copperfield (1969 film)
Day for Night (film)
Days of Heaven
Dear Heart
Delbert Mann
Desire Under the Elms (film)
Dheepan
Directors Guild of America
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Drama (film and television)
Drive My Car (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
DuPont Show of the Month
Dumbo
Elephant (2003 film)
Empire of the Sun (film)
Ernest Borgnine
Esther Minciotti
Eternity and a Day
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Fahrenheit 9/11
Far from Heaven
Far from the Madding Crowd (1967 film)
Farewell My Concubine (film)
Fargo (1996 film)
Finding Neverland (film)
First Cow
Fitzwilly
Five Easy Pieces
Ford Star Jubilee
Forrest Gump
Francis Gary Powers: The True Story of the U-2 Spy Incident
Frank Ross Productions
Frank Sutton
Friendly Persuasion (1956 film)
From Here to Eternity
Gandhi (film)
Gate of Hell (film)
Gene Kelly
Gentleman's Agreement
George Glass
Gideon (play)
Gigi (1958 film)
Gilbert Kurland
Gladiator (2000 film)
Gods and Monsters (film)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Gone with the Wind (film)
Good Night, and Good Luck
Goodfellas
Goodyear Television Playhouse
Grand Concourse (Bronx)
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Green Book (film)
Gun Hill Road (Bronx)
Halburt Productions
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hannah and Her Sisters
Harold Hecht
Harold Hecht Productions
Harold Hecht filmography
Harry Kleiner
Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Films
Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Productions
Hecht-Lancaster & Buzzell Music
Hecht-Lancaster Productions
Hecht & Buzzell Music
Hecht — Lancaster
Heidi (1968 film)
Henry V (1944 film)
Her (film)
High Noon
His Majesty O'Keefe
Holiday Song
Hollywood blacklist
Home to Stay
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Howards End (film)
Hugo (film)
I, Daniel Blake
IMDb (identifier)
IND Concourse Line
IRT Jerome Avenue Line
IRT Third Avenue Line
IRT White Plains Road Line
ISBN (identifier)
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
If....
In Which We Serve
In the Heat of the Night (film)
Incident in a Small Town
Internet Movie Database
Ironclads (film)
It's Always Fair Weather
It Happened One Night
James Hill (American film producer)
Jane Eyre (1970 film)
Jerry Orbach
Jerry Paris
Joe Hyams
Joe Mantell
Joseph LaShelle
Julius Caesar (1953 film)
Kagemusha
Karen Steele
Karlovy Vary International Film Festival
Kidnapped (1971 film)
Kiss the Blood Off My Hands
Kramer vs. Kramer
L'Enfant (film)
L.A. Confidential (film)
La Dolce Vita
La La Land
Lady Bird (film)
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leaving Las Vegas
Leigh Music
Letters from Iwo Jima
Library of Congress
Licorice Pizza
Lights Out (radio show)
Lily in Winter
List of American films of 1955
List of directorial debuts
Loring Buzzell
Lou Grant (TV series)
Louella Parsons
Love's Dark Ride
Love Leads the Way: A True Story
Lover Come Back (1961 film)
Lu Ann Simms
M*A*S*H (film)
Macbeth (1971 film)
Mad Max: Fury Road
Maine Records
Man of Iron
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Marty (The Philco Television Playhouse)
Marty (teleplay)
Marxism
María Candelaria
Maxwell Arnow
Men Without Wings
Middle of the Night
Midnight Cowboy
Milk (2008 American film)
Million Dollar Baby
Miracle in Milan
Miss Julie (1951 film)
Missing (1982 film)
Mississippi Burning
Mister Buddwing
Monsieur Verdoux
Moonlight (2016 film)
Moulin Rouge!
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mrs. Miniver
Mulholland Drive (film)
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Left Foot
Mystic River (film)
NBC Sunday Showcase
Nancy Marchand
Nashville (film)
Nat Perrin
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Award for Best Actor
National Board of Review Award for Best Film
National Board of Review Awards 1955
National Film Preservation Board
National Film Registry
Neecha Nagar
Network (1976 film)
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
Night Crossing
Night Must Fall (1937 film)
No Country for Old Men
No Place to Run (film)
Nomadland
None but the Lonely Heart (film)
Norlan Productions
Norma Productions
O Pagador de Promessas
Oliver! (film)
Omnibus (American TV program)
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Ordinary People
Othello (1951 film)
Out of Africa (film)
Paddy Chayefsky
Padre Padrone
Paint Your Wagon (film)
Paisan
Palme d'Or
Parasite (2019 film)
Paris, Texas (film)
Pastoral Symphony (film)
Patton (film)
Pelle the Conqueror
Platoon (film)
Playhouse 90
Playwrights '56
Printer's Measure
Prizzi's Honor
Producers' Showcase
Pulp Fiction
Question 7
Quick, Before It Melts
Quills (film)
Quiz Show (film)
Rain Man
Rebecca (1940 film)
Reds (film)
Robert Priestley
Rocky
Rod Steiger
Roma (2018 film)
Romance film
Rome, Open City
Rome News-Tribune
Rosetta (film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Roy Webb
Run Silent, Run Deep (film)
SIGNIS
Saving Private Ryan
Scarecrow (1973 film)
Schindler's List
Secrets & Lies (film)
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Separate Tables (film)
Sex, Lies, and Videotape
Shakespeare in Love
She Waits
Shine (film)
Shoplifters (film)
Sideways
Slumdog Millionaire
Sons and Lovers (film)
Spotlight (film)
Startime (1959 TV series)
Summer of the Seventeenth Doll (1959 film)
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Sweet Smell of Success
Sweet Smell of Success (soundtrack)
Take a Giant Step
Taste of Cherry
Taxi Driver
Ted Haworth
Tell Me My Name
Ten Tall Men
Terms of Endearment
That Touch of Mink
The Accidental Tourist (film)
The Americanization of Emily
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Bachelor Party
The Ballad of Narayama (1983 film)
The Best Intentions
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Birds, the Bees and the Italians
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Bronx
The Catered Affair (Goodyear Television Playhouse)
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Class (2008 film)
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Conversation
The Cranes Are Flying
The Crimson Pirate
The Damned (1947 film)
The Dark at the Top of the Stairs (film)
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Departed
The Devil's Disciple (1959 film)
The Eel (film)
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story
The English Patient (film)
The First Time (1952 film)
The First Woman President
The Flame and the Arrow
The French Connection (film)
The Gift of Love: A Christmas Story
The Go-Between (1971 film)
The Goddess (1958 film)
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great American Hoax
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Hireling
The Hospital
The Hours (film)
The Hurt Locker
The Informer (1935 film)
The Irishman
The Kentuckian (1955 film)
The King's Speech
The Knack ...and How to Get It
The Last Chance (1945 film)
The Last Days of Patton
The Last Emperor
The Latent Heterosexual
The Legendary Curse of the Hope Diamond
The Leopard (1963 film)
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Long Absence
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Man Without a Country (1973 film)
The Mattei Affair
The Member of the Wedding (1982 film)
The Mission (1986 film)
The Mother (The Philco Television Playhouse)
The New York Times
The Nun's Story (film)
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Outsider (1961 film)
The Ox-Bow Incident
The Passion of Josef D.
The Philco-Goodyear Television Playhouse
The Philco Television Playhouse
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Piano
The Pink Jungle
The Player (1992 film)
The Post (film)
The Quiet Man
The Rabbit Trap
The Red Meadows
The Reluctant Citizen
The Shape of Water
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Silent World
The Sixth Year
The Social Network
The Son's Room
The Sopranos
The Sound of Music (film)
The Square (2017 film)
The Sting
The Ted Kennedy Jr. Story
The Tenth Man (Chayefsky play)
The Third Man
The Tin Drum (film)
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Tree of Life (film)
The Tree of Wooden Clogs
The True Glory
The Turning Point (1945 film)
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Umbrellas of Cherbourg
The Unforgiven (1960 film)
The Wages of Fear
The White Ribbon
The Wind That Shakes the Barley (film)
The Working Class Goes to Heaven
The Young Savages
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
Thou Shalt Not Commit Adultery
Titane
Titanic (1997 film)
To Find My Son
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tom and Joann
Top Gun: Maverick
Topaze (1933 American film)
Topsy-Turvy
Torment (1944 film)
Torn Between Two Lovers (film)
Traffic (2000 film)
Trapeze (film)
Triangle of Sadness
Turner Classic Movies
Two Cents Worth of Hope
Tár
Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives
Under the Sun of Satan (film)
Underground (1995 film)
Unforgiven
Union Pacific (film)
United 93 (film)
United Artists
United Productions of America
Universal-International Pictures
Universal Pictures
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Vera Cruz (film)
Viridiana
Walter M. Simonds
Walter Seltzer
Warner Brothers Pictures
Watch on the Rhine
West Side Story (1961 film)
When Father Was Away on Business
White Plains Road
Wild at Heart (film)
Wings (1927 film)
Winter Sleep (film)
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written Drama
Wuthering Heights (1939 film)
Yol
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Z (1969 film)
Zero Dark Thirty
Ziegfeld Follies (film)
http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/ficheFilm/id/3716/year/1955.html
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/16/betsy-blair-obituary
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1013427-marty/
https://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/19/movies/19blair.html?_r=0
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/31612/Marty/awards
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v31612
http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/69-editions/palme/a-brief-history-of-the-palme-d-or
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048356/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048356/business
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0037884/awards?ref_=tt_awd
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048356/awards?ref_=tt_awd
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/53405
https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/educational-magazines/marty
https://www.nytimes.com/1994/11/15/movies/25-films-added-to-national-registry.html
https://www.variety.com/review/VE1117487989
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/83011/enwp
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=348&dat=20071113&id=wNNDAAAAIBAJ&pg=1569,1672942&hl=en
https://web.archive.org/web/20120210230703/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/31612/Marty/awards
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1013427-marty/reviews
https://www.nytimes.com/1956/01/29/archives/rod-steiger-from-va-to-vip-on-screen-japanese-triangle.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20081215035457/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,866248,00.html
https://jacksonupperco.com/tag/the-philco-goodyear-television-playhouse/page/2/
