Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
Mutiny on the Bounty is a 1935  Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer drama film directed by Frank Lloyd and starring Charles Laughton and Clark Gable, based on the 1932 Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall novel Mutiny on the Bounty.
Despite historical inaccuracies, the film was a huge box office success, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1935 and one of MGM's biggest hits of the 1930s. The film received a leading eight nominations at the 8th Academy Awards, winning only Best Picture.


== Plot ==
One night in Portsmouth, England, in 1787, a press gang breaks into a local tavern and presses all of the men drinking there into naval service.  One of the men enquires as to what ship they will sail on, and the press gang leader informs him that it is HMS Bounty. Upon inquiring as to who the captain is, another man is told the captain is William Bligh (Charles Laughton) and attempts to escape, as Bligh is a brutal tyrant who routinely administers harsh punishment to officers and crew alike who lack discipline, cause any infraction on board the ship, or defy his authority in any manner.
The Bounty leaves England several days later on a two-year voyage over the Pacific Ocean. Fletcher Christian (Clark Gable), the ship's lieutenant, is a formidable yet compassionate man who disapproves of Bligh's treatment of the crew. Roger Byam (Franchot Tone) is an idealistic midshipman who is divided between his loyalty to Bligh, owing to his family's naval tradition, and his friendship with Christian.
During the voyage, the enmity between Christian and Bligh grows after Christian openly challenges Bligh's unjust practices aboard the ship. When the ship arrives at the island of Tahiti, where the crew acquires breadfruit plants to take to the West Indies, Bligh punishes Christian by refusing to let him leave the ship during their stay.
Byam, meanwhile, sets up residency on the island and lives with the island chief, Hitihiti (William Bambridge), and his daughter, Tehani (Movita Castaneda), and he compiles an English dictionary of the Tahitian language. Hitihiti persuades Bligh to allow Christian a day pass on the island. Bligh agrees, but quickly repeals the pass out of spite. Christian disregards the order and spends his day off the ship romancing a Tahitian girl, Maimiti (Mamo Clark). Christian promises her he will be back someday.
After leaving Tahiti, the crew begins to talk of mutiny after Bligh's harsh discipline leads to the death of the ship's beloved surgeon, Mr. Bacchus (Dudley Digges), and Bligh severely cuts water rationing to the crew in favor of providing more water for the breadfruit plants.
Christian, although initially opposing the idea, decides he can no longer tolerate Bligh's brutality when he witnesses crew members shackled in iron chains, and he approves the mutiny. The crew raids the weapons cabinet and seizes the ship. Bligh and his loyalists are cast into a boat and set adrift at sea with a map and rations to ensure their survival. Due to Bligh's steady leadership, they are able to find their way back to land.
Meanwhile, Christian orders that Bounty return to Tahiti. Byam, who was in his cabin during the mutiny, disapproves of what Christian has done and decides the two can no longer be friends.
Months later, Byam is married to Tehani, and Christian has married Maimiti and has a child with her, while the rest of the crew are enjoying their freedom on the island. After a long estrangement, Byam and Christian reconcile their friendship. However, when the British ship HMS Pandora is spotted approaching, Byam and Christian decide they must part ways. Byam and several crew members remain on the island for the ship to take them back to England, while Christian leads the remaining crew, his wife, and several Tahitian men and women back on board Bounty in search of a new island on which to seek refuge.
Byam boards Pandora and, much to his surprise, discovers that Bligh is the captain. Bligh, who suspects that Byam was complicit in the mutiny, has him imprisoned for the remainder of the journey across the sea.
Back in England, Byam is court-martialed and found guilty of mutiny. Before the court condemns him, Byam speaks of Bligh's cruel, dehumanising conduct aboard Bounty. Due to the intervention of his friend Sir Joseph Banks (Henry Stephenson) and Lord Hood (David Torrence), Byam is pardoned by King George III and allowed to resume his naval career at sea.
Meanwhile, Christian has found Pitcairn, an uninhabited yet sustainable island that he believes will provide adequate refuge from the reach of the Royal Navy. After Bounty crashes on the rocks, Christian orders her to be burned.


== Cast ==


== Historical accuracy ==
The movie contains several historical inaccuracies. Captain Bligh was never on board HMS Pandora, nor was he present at the trial of the mutineers who stayed on Tahiti.
At the time, he was halfway around the world on a second voyage for breadfruit plants. Fletcher Christian's father had died many years before Christian's travels on board Bounty, whereas the film shows the elder Christian at the trial. The movie was always presented as an adaptation of the Nordhoff and Hall trilogy, which already differed from the actual story of the mutiny.
Bligh is initially depicted as a brutal, sadistic disciplinarian, only becoming more sympathetic during the voyage to Timor. Particular episodes include a keelhauling and flogging a dead man. Neither of these happened. Keelhauling was used rarely, if at all, and had been abandoned long before Bligh's time. Indeed, the meticulous record of Bounty's log reveals that the flogging rate was lower than the average for that time.Prior to the mutiny, Bounty had only two deaths. One seaman, James Valentine, died of an ill-defined respiratory illness; logs indicate he was "seized with a violent hollow Cough and spit much." And the ship's surgeon, Thomas Huggan, apparently died of complications due to his chronic alcoholism, not as a result of abuse by Bligh. In fact, Bligh had threatened to seize and impound Huggan's alcohol stocks on account of him regularly being intoxicated while on duty, a threat Bligh eventually carried out. Huggan's constant drunkenness left Bligh little choice but to oversee key health issues himself. Notably, the crew had been examined constantly for scurvy, and Bligh – his expertise in this matter developed under Captain James Cook – had detected no verified signs of the illness at any time.
Likewise, the film shows the mutineers taking over the ship only after killing several loyal crewmen, when in fact none died (although one crewman came very close to shooting Bligh until stopped by Christian). Lastly, Christian is shown being inspired to take over the ship after several crewmen have unjustly been put into irons by Bligh; this is fictional.In the final scene of the film, Christian gives a rousing speech to his fellow mutineers, speaking of creating a perfect society of free men on Pitcairn, away from Bligh and the navy. The reality was very different as mutineers enslaved Tahitian men.For historical accuracy, Clark Gable reluctantly had to shave off his moustache because the sailors in the Royal Navy in the 18th century had to be clean-shaven. Midshipman Roger Byam was based on a real person, Midshipman Peter Heywood, who is not listed in the novel or motion picture. Just as the fictional Byam is pardoned at the end of the film, the real-life Peter Heywood was pardoned for his part in the mutiny. MGM trailers in 1935 made an error calling Midshipman Byam an ensign.
Mutineer Thomas Ellison is depicted as being allowed to see his wife before his execution. There is no record to indicate that the real Ellison was married, and in any case, a consolation visit of this type never would have been permitted in real life.


== Production ==


=== Filming locations ===
French Polynesia
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios – 10202 W. Washington Blvd., Culver City, California, USA (studio)
Monterey Bay, Monterey, California, USA
Monterey Harbor, Monterey, California, USA
Sailing Ship Restaurant, Pier 42, The Embarcadero, San Francisco, California, USA (ship "Ellen" as "The Bounty")
San Miguel Island, California, USA
Santa Barbara Channel, Channel Islands, California, USA
Santa Catalina Island, Channel Islands, California, USA
South Beach Harbor, South Beach, San Francisco, California, USA (ship "Ellen" as "The Bounty")
South Pacific, Pacific Ocean
Tahiti, French PolynesiaJames Cagney (then on a hiatus from Warner Bros. during a contract dispute) and future stars David Niven and Dick Haymes were uncredited extras in the movie. Cagney is clearly visible toward the beginning of the film. He was sailing his boat near where the film was shooting near Catalina Island; director Frank Lloyd was an old friend of his, and Cagney asked him if he could play a small part in the film, saying, jokingly, "I need the money". Lloyd had Cagney dressed in a crewman's clothes and put him in the background of a few scenes.
Charles Laughton, who had a severe self-image complex concerning his weight and unattractive looks, suffered horribly in comparing himself to the handsome, masculine Clark Gable. Laughton would constantly watch his own walk, gestures, and face, making sure not to let his complex be projected.


=== Ships ===
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer acquired and modified the sailing ship Lily, a two-masted schooner, to be used as the three-masted full-rigged Bounty in the movie. As a replica of the second ship, Pandora, Nanuk was used.
Both ships sailed to Tahiti and back for film shoots at the original locations.


== Reception ==
Contemporary reviews were enthusiastic. Andre Sennwald of The New York Times wrote, "Grim, brutal, sturdily romantic, made out of horror and desperate courage, it is as savagely exciting and rousingly dramatic a photoplay as has come out of Hollywood in recent years. The Nordhoff-Hall trilogy was, of course, born to be filmed, and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer has given it the kind of production a great story deserves." The Hollywood Reporter raved that it was "one of the greatest films of all time", with "the epic sweep of the sea itself." Variety called it "Hollywood at its very best. The story certainly could not have been presented as powerfully through any other medium." Film Daily wrote, "This is one of the most important productions since the inception of talking pictures. It is grim, gripping and pictorially perfect." John Mosher of The New Yorker declared that the filmmakers had "done a good, solid, fine job" and wrote that Laughton's performance as Captain Bligh "may not be exactly the image of the original brute, but it's a Laughton masterpiece." Mutiny on the Bounty topped the annual Film Daily poll of 523 critics as the best film of 1936 (it was released too late in the year to appear on the 1935 ballot).Rotten Tomatoes reports a 96% approval rating based on 74 reviews, with a weighted average of 8.60/10. The site's consensus reads: "The historical inaccuracies in this high-seas adventure are more than offset by its timeless themes, larger-than-life performances from Clark Gable and Charles Laughton, and Frank Lloyd's superb direction".


=== Box office ===
According to MGM records the film earned $2,250,000 in the US and Canada and $2,210,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $909,000.It was the 3rd most popular film at the British box office in 1935–36.


== Awards and honors ==


=== Academy Awards ===
This film is, as of 2023, the last Best Picture winner to win in no other category (following The Broadway Melody and Grand Hotel).  It is the only film to have three Best Actor nominations. As a result of this, a Best Supporting Actor category was created for the Oscars, beginning with the following year's awards ceremony.


=== Other honors ===
American Film Institute recognition

AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #86
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:
Captain Bligh, Villain #19


== Cancelled sequels ==
In 1940 Frank Lloyd was reported as wanting to make a film about the life of Captain Bligh starring Spencer Tracy or Charles Laughton, at Universal. It was never made.In 1945, it was reported that MGM would make a sequel with Gable, Christian of the Bounty. It would be based on a novel by Charles Nordhoff about Christian's romantic adventures in England and South America following the colonization of Pitcairn Island and would be produced by Carey Wilson. It was never made.


== Other film versions ==
A 1962 three-hour-plus widescreen Technicolor remake, starring Marlon Brando as Fletcher Christian and Trevor Howard as Capt. Bligh, was a disaster both critically and financially at the time. Nonetheless, the remake was nominated for a Best Picture Oscar.
In 1984, Mel Gibson played Christian opposite Anthony Hopkins as Bligh in a film (based not upon the Nordhoff-Hall novels but on an historical work by Richard Hough) called The Bounty. This latest version, which gives a far more sympathetic view of Bligh, is considered to be the closest to historical events.
The 1935 version was itself not the first film account of the mutiny. In 1933 an Australian film entitled In the Wake of the Bounty, with the then-unknown Errol Flynn as Fletcher Christian, was released, but was not successful and received few bookings outside Australia. Flynn noted in his autobiography that whenever he mentioned that he'd played Christian in an Australian version of Mutiny on the Bounty two years before Gable, no one ever believed him. There was also an even earlier film, the 1916 Australian–New Zealand film, The Mutiny of the Bounty directed by Raymond Longford.


== Parodies ==
Friz Freleng's cartoon Mutiny on the Bunny casts Yosemite Sam (called Shanghai Sam) as a foul-tempered skipper who shanghais Bugs Bunny, only to see Bugs rebel. Also, in one scene in Freleng's earlier Buccaneer Bunny, Bugs dresses up as Capt. Bligh (including a visual and vocal impression of Charles Laughton) and barks out orders to Sam (called Seagoin' Sam)
The 1967 Lost in Space episode "Mutiny in Space" features Ronald Long imitating Charles Laughton in the role of spaceship captain "Admiral Zahrk"
Morecambe and Wise performed a sketch with Arthur Lowe (who played Captain Mainwaring in Dad's Army) as Captain Bligh. At the end of the sketch it is announced Bligh has some loyal crewmen who turn out to be other cast members of Dad's Army
"Holidays at Home", a 1978 episode of It Ain't Half Hot Mum, includes a dream sequence where the sitcom's cast enact scenes from the film
The Simpsons episode "The Wettest Stories Ever Told" features the family telling stories set on ships. The second segment is a parody on Mutiny on the Bounty and casts Principal Skinner as Capt. Bligh, brutalizing the crew members (played by Bart, Milhouse, Martin, Nelson, Jimbo, Dolph and Kearney)


== References ==


== External links ==

Mutiny on the Bounty (1935) at IMDb
Mutiny on the Bounty at the TCM Movie Database
Synopsis at AllMovie
Mutiny on the Bounty at the American Film Institute Catalog
Mutiny on the Bounty at Rotten Tomatoes
Southseascinema.org
Mutiny on the Bounty at Virtual History12 Years a Slave (film)
1935 in film
8th Academy Awards
9th Academy Awards
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Day at the Races (film)
A Free Soul
A Lady's Morals
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Midsummer Night's Dream (1935 film)
A Night at the Opera (film)
A Passport to Hell
A Tale of Two Cities (1917 film)
A Tale of Two Worlds
A Voice in the Dark (film)
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay)
Adoration (1928 film)
Alec Craig
Alexander Hood, 1st Viscount Bridport
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Film Institute
American Methods
An American in Paris (film)
An International Marriage
Anna Christie (1930 English-language film)
Annie Hall
Anthony Hopkins
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arthur Edeson
Arthur Lowe
As You Desire Me (film)
Ashes of Vengeance
Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ (1925 film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Berkeley Square (1933 film)
Bibliography of the Pitcairn Islands
Billy the Kid (1930 film)
Birdman (film)
Black Oxen
Blood on the Sun
Bombshell (1933 film)
Bounty (1960 ship)
Bounty (1978 ship)
Bounty Bible
Bounty Day
Braveheart
Breadfruit
Broadway Melody of 1938
Bronisław Kaper
Brown of Harvard (1926 film)
Buccaneer Bunny
Bugs Bunny
Byron Russell (actor)
CODA (2021 film)
Camille (1936 film)
Captain (nautical)
Captain Bligh
Captain Mainwaring
Carey Wilson (writer)
Casablanca (film)
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Channel Islands (California)
Chariots of Fire
Charles Laughton
Charles Nordhoff
Chicago (2002 film)
Children of Divorce (1927 film)
China Seas (film)
Cimarron (1931 film)
Clark Gable
Complement of HMS Bounty
Crash (2004 film)
Crauford Kent
Culver City, California
Dad's Army
Dances with Wolves
Dark Streets (1929 film)
David Garrick (1916 film)
David Nelson (botanical collector)
David Niven
David Torrence (actor)
DeWitt Jennings
Descendants of the Bounty mutineers
Dick Haymes
Dick Winslow
Donald Crisp
Douglas Walton (actor)
Drag (film)
Drama (film and television)
Driving Miss Daisy
Dudley Digges (actor)
Dudley Nichols
East Lynne (1931 film)
Eddie Quillan
Edward Edwards (Royal Navy officer)
Errol Flynn
Eskimo (1933 film)
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Fandango Media
Film Daily
Flesh and the Devil
Fletcher Christian
For Freedom (1918 film)
Forever and a Day (1943 film)
Forrest Gump
Franchot Tone
Francis Lister
Frank Lloyd
Freaks (1932 film)
French Polynesia
Friz Freleng
From Here to Eternity
Full-rigged ship
Gandhi (film)
Gentleman's Agreement
George III of the United Kingdom
Gigi (1958 film)
Gladiator (2000 film)
Going My Way
Gone with the Wind (film)
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Green Book (film)
HMS Bounty
HMS Pandora (1779)
Hal LeSueur
Hallelujah (film)
Hamlet (1948 film)
Harry Allen (actor)
He Who Gets Slapped (film)
Henry Stephenson
Her Husband's Secret
Herbert Mundin
Herbert Stothart
His Glorious Night
His Hour
History of the Pitcairn Islands
Hoop-La
How Green Was My Valley (film)
IMDb (identifier)
Ian Wolfe
If I Were King
Impressment
In the Heat of the Night (film)
In the Wake of the Bounty
Inspiration (1931 film)
Invisible Agent
Irving Thalberg
Irving Thalberg Jr.
It Ain't Half Hot Mum
It Happened One Night
Ivan F. Simpson
James Cagney
James Morrison (mutineer)
James Norman Hall
Jane (1915 film)
John Adams (mutineer)
John Ford
John Fryer (Royal Navy officer)
John Hallett (Royal Navy officer)
John Mosher (writer)
Jules Furthman
Just a Gigolo (1931 film)
Keelhauling
Kramer vs. Kramer
La Bohème (1926 film)
Laugh, Clown, Laugh
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Les Misérables (1917 film)
Let Us Be Gay
Letty Lynton
Lily (ship)
List of Lost in Space episodes
London After Midnight (film)
Los Angeles Times
Lost in Space
Madame X (1920 film)
Madame la Presidente
Maid of Salem
Mamo Clark
Margaret Booth
Marie Antoinette (1938 film)
Marlon Brando
Marty (film)
Mata Hari (1931 film)
Matthew Quintal
Mauatua
Max Steiner
Maytime (1937 film)
Mel Gibson
Men Against the Sea
Merry-Go-Round (1923 film)
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Michael Byrne (sailor)
Midnight Cowboy
Midshipman
Million Dollar Baby
Monterey, California
Moonlight (2016 film)
Morecambe and Wise
Moustache
Movita Castaneda
Mrs. Miniver
Mutiny on the Bounty
Mutiny on the Bounty (1962 film)
Mutiny on the Bounty (novel)
Mutiny on the Bunny
My Fair Lady (film)
Nanuk (ship)
Ned Young
No Country for Old Men
No More Ladies
Nomadland
Norma Shearer
Oliver! (film)
Oliver Twist (1922 film)
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Ordinary People
Out of Africa (film)
Pacific Ocean
Parasite (2019 film)
Pat Flaherty (actor)
Patton (film)
Peter Heywood
Pitcairn's Island (novel)
Pitcairn (play)
Pitcairn Island
Pitcairn Islands
Pitfalls of a Big City
Platoon (film)
Portsmouth, England
Possessed (1931 film)
Principal Skinner
Private Lives (film)
Pōmare I
Rain Man
Ralph Dawson
Rasputin and the Empress
Raymond Longford
Rebecca (1940 film)
Red-Headed Woman
Red Dust (1932 film)
Redemption (1930 film)
Richard Hough
Riders of the Purple Sage (1918 film)
Riffraff (1936 film)
Riptide (1934 film)
Roads of Destiny
Rocky
Romeo and Juliet (1936 film)
Ronald Long
Rotten Tomatoes
Royal Navy
Rulers of the Sea
Saboteur (film)
San Miguel Island
Santa Barbara Channel
Santa Catalina Island, California
Schindler's List
Schooner
Servants' Entrance
Shakespeare in Love
Show People
Sins of Her Parent
Sir Joseph Banks
Slumdog Millionaire
Smilin' Through (1932 film)
Son of the Gods
South Beach, San Francisco
Spencer Tracy
Spotlight (film)
Spring Byington
Stanley Fields (actor)
Strange Interlude (film)
Tahiti
Talbot Jennings
Tarzan the Ape Man (1932 film)
Technicolor
Terms of Endearment
The Age for Love
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Barretts of Wimpole Street (1934 film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Big House (1930 film)
The Big Parade
The Blindness of Divorce
The Bounty (1984 film)
The Bounty Trilogy
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Call of the Cumberlands
The Champ (1931 film)
The Code of Marcia Gray
The Crowd (1928 film)
The Deer Hunter
The Departed
The Divine Lady
The Divorcee
The Eagle of the Sea
The Embarcadero, San Francisco
The English Patient (film)
The Eternal Flame (film)
The Eventful History of the Mutiny and Piratical Seizure of HMS Bounty
The French Connection (film)
The Gentleman from Indiana
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Good Earth (film)
The Great Lover (1920 film)
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Grim Comedian
The Guardsman
The Heart of a Lion
The Hollywood Reporter
The Hollywood Revue
The Howards of Virginia
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1923 film)
The Hurt Locker
The Informer (1935 film)
The Intrigue
The Invisible Power
The King's Speech
The Kingdom of Love
The Kiss (1929 film)
The Lady from Cheyenne
The Lash (1930 film)
The Last Command (1955 film)
The Last Emperor
The Last of Mrs. Cheyney (1929 film)
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Love of the Last Tycoon
The Loves of Letty
The Making of Maddalena
The Man Hunter (1919 film)
The Man from Lost River
The Merry Widow (1925 film)
The Merry Widow (1934 film)
The Mutineers of the Bounty
The Mutiny of the Bounty
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Price of Silence (1917 film)
The Rainbow Trail (1918 film)
The Reform Candidate
The Right of Way (1931 film)
The Road to Mandalay (1926 film)
The Rogue Song
The Sea Hawk (1924 film)
The Secret Six
The Shanghai Story
The Shape of Water
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Silent Watcher
The Silver Horde (1920 film)
The Simpsons
The Sin Flood (1922 film)
The Sin of Madelon Claudet
The Sound of Music (film)
The Splendid Road
The Spoilers (1942 film)
The Sting
The Stronger Love
The Student Prince in Old Heidelberg
The Temptress
The Tongues of Men
The Tower of Lies
The Trap (1922 film)
The Trial of Mary Dugan (1929 film)
The Unholy Three (1925 film)
The Unholy Three (1930 film)
The Voice from the Minaret
The Way of All Men
The Wettest Stories Ever Told
The Wise Guy
The Woman in Room 13
The World and Its Woman
The World and the Woman
This Woman Is Mine
Thomas Ellison (mutineer)
Thomas Hayward (Royal Navy officer)
Titanic (1997 film)
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Torrent (1926 film)
Trader Horn (1931 film)
Trevor Howard
True Blue (1918 film)
Tugboat Annie
Turner Classic Movies
Twelve Miles Out
Under Two Flags (1936 film)
Unforgiven
Valencia (1926 film)
Variety (magazine)
Vernon Downing
Victor McLaglen
Voice of the City
Wallis Clark
Walter Jurmann
Warner Bros.
Way for a Sailor
Wayback Machine
Weary River
Weighted arithmetic mean
Wells Fargo (film)
West Side Story (1961 film)
West of Zanzibar (1928 film)
What Every Woman Knows (1934 film)
When a Man Sees Red
Where East Is East
White Shadows in the South Seas
Widescreen
William Bligh
William McCoy (mutineer)
William Muspratt
Winds of Chance
Wings (1927 film)
Within the Law (1923 film)
Yosemite Sam
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Young Nowheres
http://southseascinema.org/index.html
http://www.virtual-history.com/movie/film/1124/mutiny-on-the-bounty
http://www.movieguy247.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=1155:all-quiet-on-the-western-front&catid=48:these-are-some-classic-flicks&Itemid=28
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9D01E6DF163CE53ABC4153DFB767838E629EDE
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v33980
https://web.archive.org/web/20130317141548/http://movieguy247.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=1155:all-quiet-on-the-western-front&catid=48:these-are-some-classic-flicks&Itemid=28
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0026752/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/7072
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1014481-mutiny_on_the_bounty
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1014481_mutiny_on_the_bounty
https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/story/2020-03-13/movies-on-tv-this-week-sunday-march-15-2020
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/15288/enwp
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q329709#identifiers
https://blogs.loc.gov/law/2013/04/mutiny-and-other-crimes-part-1/
https://www.movieguide.org/reviews/movies/mutiny-on-the-bounty.html
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no2007043646
https://web.archive.org/web/20120222032844/http://www.winthrop.dk/bounty/lily.html
https://catalog.afi.com/Film/7072-MUTINY-ONTHEBOUNTY?sid=9d846edf-7655-405b-875b-421f78b9630b&sr=13.675284&cp=1&pos=0
https://jayseaarchaeology.wordpress.com/2023/01/29/the-first-replica-bounty/
