Naughty Marietta (film)
Naughty Marietta is a 1935 American romantic musical film based on the 1910 operetta of the same name by Victor Herbert. Jeanette MacDonald stars as a princess who flees an arranged marriage. She sails for New Orleans and is rescued from pirates by Captain Richard Warrington (Nelson Eddy).
Five of Herbert's most famous songs come from the score of Naughty Marietta, with words by lyricist Rida Johnson Young: "Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life", "Italian Street Song", "Neath the Southern Moon", "I'm Falling in Love with Someone" and "Tramp! Tramp! Tramp! (Along the Highway)". Additional lyrics for several of Herbert's songs were penned for the film by Gus Kahn. The film was written by Frances Goodrich, Albert Hackett, John Lee Mahin and Rida Johnson Young.


== Plot ==
To avoid an arranged marriage to Don Carlos, an elderly Spanish duke, Princess Marie masquerades as her uncle's former servant, Marietta, and escapes from France on a ship with casquette girls who are traveling to New Orleans to marry colonists. On board, Marietta befriends Julie.
En route, the women discuss what type of man they want to marry. "Marietta" shocks the other girls by stating that she does not intend to marry anyone. Shortly after, the ship is boarded by pirates, who kill the entire crew and take the girls ashore.
After the pirates divide the loot, they turn their attention to the girls. Just then, singing is heard ("Tramp! Tramp! Tramp!"). The pirates extinguish their torches and fire to try to avoid detection, but Marietta takes one of the torches and runs towards the sound of the singing, crying out "help, help". Mercenaries rout the pirates and rescue the women.
The mercenaries' leader, Captain Richard Warrington, sings "Neath a Southern Moon" to Marietta. Despite his attraction to her, however, Warrington declares that he does not intend to marry.
Warrington and his men take the casquette girls to New Orleans, where they are welcomed by the governor. The women are housed in the convent while they get to know their potential husbands.  When some men approach Marietta, she declares that she does not want to marry any of them. The governor feels that he has seen Marietta before in Paris, but she denies it. When she pretends to have a disreputable past, the governor orders a pair of soldiers to escort her away in disgrace. Warrington relieves them of their duty and finds her a place to stay, even paying the first month's rent. Though Marietta tries to rid herself of Warrington, he is undaunted. Just then, a group of gypsies stroll by, advertising their Marionette Theater. The gypsy leader, Rodolpho, has his daughter sing, and Warrington joins in ("Italian Street Song"). Stung by Warrington's remark that she might not be able to sing as well as the gypsy, Marietta surprises him by doing so beautifully. While he is distracted getting rid of three would-be suitors, she slips away.
The following day, Warrington discovers that Marietta is working at the Marionette Theater. When he visits her after the performance, he receives a warmer reception. Soon after, however, a large award is offered for information about her whereabouts. Warrington persuades her to trust him, and takes her away by boat. During this time together, they discover that they are falling in love with each other ("I'm Falling in Love with Someone"). Later, however, they are found by French soldiers, and her true identity is revealed. Her uncle and Don Carlos are expected on the next ship to take her back.
Marietta is to attend a ball arranged by the governor in her honor. Julie comes to see her; she tells Marietta that Warrington had been ordered to leave New Orleans that day, but intends to come to the ball. Her uncle warns her that "if Warrington attempted to see her again, he would be arrested for treason and shot". Marietta asks Julie to stop Warrington from coming, but they realize it is too late when they hear him and his men singing ("Tramp! Tramp! Tramp!").
When Warrington enters the ballroom, the governor tries to get him to leave in order to save his life. Marietta pretends to have been toying with him to deceive her uncle. As Warrington is leaving, Marietta sings "Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life", joined by Warrington. The lovers then flee to the wild frontier.


== Cast ==


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Naughty Marietta grossed a total (domestic and foreign) of US$2,057,000 (equivalent to US$43,905,966 in 2022): $1,058,000 from the US and Canada and $999,000 elsewhere. It made a profit of $407,000.


=== Accolades ===
The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. Douglas Shearer won the Academy Award for Best Sound Recording for his work on the picture. In 2003, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The film and a song were nominated for the following American Film Institute lists:

2002: AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions
2004: AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs:
"Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life"
2006: AFI's Greatest Movie Musicals


== In popular culture ==
"Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life" and "Falling in Love with Someone" are used in the musical Thoroughly Modern Millie.
In the All in the Family episode "Archie the Gambler", "Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life" is sung by cast members Jean Stapleton, Rob Reiner and Sally Struthers.
In the 1971 Woody Allen film Bananas, a political prisoner is tortured by being forced to endlessly listen to the Naughty Marietta score.
The song "Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life" was used in Mel Brooks' 1974 comedy Young Frankenstein, with parts of the refrain sung by Madeline Kahn and Teri Garr.
In a second season episode of The Muppet Show, guest starring Zero Mostel, Miss Piggy expresses interest in performing Naughty Marietta.
A 1978 episode of The Waltons, "Spring Fever", has the Walton children in a cinema watching Naughty Marietta, and listening to "Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life".
In the 1980 film Bon Voyage, Charlie Brown (and Don't Come Back!!), Naughty Marietta is the in-flight movie on the plane when Charlie Brown, Linus Van Pelt, Peppermint Patty, Marcie, Snoopy and Woodstock travel to England.
In a 1983 episode of Fantasy Island, a visitor asks Mr. Roarke to have her daughter sing in an operetta, Naughty Marietta.


== References ==

Green, Stanley (1999) Hollywood Musicals Year by Year (2nd ed.), pub. Hal Leonard Corporation ISBN 0-634-00765-3 page 44


== External links ==

Naughty Marietta at the American Film Institute Catalog
Naughty Marietta at IMDb
Naughty Marietta at AllMovie
Naughty Marietta at the TCM Movie Database
Naughty Marietta at Rotten TomatoesAFI's 100 Years...100 Passions
AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs
AFI's Greatest Movie Musicals
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Lady of Chance
A Little Journey
A Mormon Maid
A Tale of Two Cities (1935 film)
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound
According to Hoyle (film)
Adam and Evil (1927 film)
Adriana Caselotti
After Office Hours
After the Thin Man
Akim Tamiroff
Albert Hackett
AllMovie
All in the Family
American Film Institute
Andy Hardy Gets Spring Fever
Another Thin Man
April Folly
At First Sight (1917 film)
B.F.'s Daughter
Baby Mine (1928 film)
Bananas (film)
Barriers Burned Away
Beautiful but Dangerous
Bitter Sweet (1940 film)
Blanche Sewell
Bon Voyage, Charlie Brown (and Don't Come Back!!)
Bright Lights (1925 film)
British Board of Film Classification
Broadway Rose (film)
Broadway Serenade
Cairo (1942 film)
California (1927 film)
Casquette girl
Cecilia Parker
Charlie Brown
Cheaper to Marry
Christmas Memories (film)
Circe, the Enchantress
Cynthia (film)
Dance Madness
Dancing Lady
Danger, Go Slow
Daredevil Jack
Double Adventure
Douglas Shearer
Douglass Dumbrille
Dr. Kildare's Victory
Duchess of Idaho
Edward Brophy
Elsa Lanchester
England
Escapade (1935 film)
Eskimo (1933 film)
Everything I Have Is Yours (film)
Eyes of the Totem
Face Value (1918 film)
Fantasy Island
Fascination (1922 film)
Fashion Row
Five and Ten
Foreign Devils (1927 film)
Forget Me Not (1922 film)
Forsaking All Others
Frances Goodrich
Frank Morgan
Gift O' Gab
Gold Heels (film)
Greta Meyer
Grounds for Marriage
Guilty Hands
Gus Kahn
Half-A-Dollar-Bill
Harold Huber
Hearts and Spurs
Heedless Moths
Helen Shipman
Her Body in Bond
Her Twelve Men
Hide-Out
His Brother's Wife
Hunt Stromberg
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Live My Life
I Love You Again
I Married an Angel (film)
I Take This Woman (1940 film)
In Gay Madrid
In the Good Old Summertime
It's a Wise Child (film)
It's a Wonderful World (1939 film)
Italian Street Song
Jazzmania
Jean Stapleton
Jeanette MacDonald
John Lee Mahin
Journey for Margaret
Judge Not; or The Woman of Mona Diggings
Kelly and Me
Laughing Boy (film)
Let Us Be Gay
Library of Congress
Linus Van Pelt
Little Eve Edgarton
Loews Cineplex Entertainment
Love's Wilderness
Love on the Run (1936 film)
Lovers Courageous
Loving Lies
Madeline Kahn
Mademoiselle Midnight
Mademoiselle Modiste (film)
Manhattan Melodrama
Marcie
Marianne (1929 musical film)
Marianne (1929 silent film)
Marie Antoinette (1938 film)
Marionette
Marriage Is a Private Affair
Mary Doran
Maytime (1937 film)
Mel Brooks
Men of the Desert
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Miss Piggy
Modern Love (1918 film)
Musical film
Nancy Goes to Rio
National Film Registry
Naughty Marietta (Max Liebman Presents)
Naughty Marietta (operetta)
Nelson Eddy
Never the Twain Shall Meet (1931 film)
New Moon (1940 film)
New Orleans
Night Court (film)
On Record (film)
Open Places
Outcast Lady
Peacock Alley (1922 film)
Peg o' My Heart (1933 film)
Penthouse (film)
Peppermint Patty
Personal Property (film)
Piccadilly Jim (1936 film)
Pride and Prejudice (1940 film)
Princess Virtue
Rage in Heaven
Ranger of the Big Pines
Raymond Massey
Rida Johnson Young
Rob Reiner
Robert Z. Leonard
Romance film
Rosalie (1937 film)
Rose Marie (1936 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Sadie Goes to Heaven
Sally Struthers
San Francisco (1936 film)
Secret Love (1916 film)
Shadow of the Thin Man
Small Town Girl (1936 film)
Snoopy
Spoilers of the West
Stand By for Action
Stand Up and Fight (film)
Strange Interlude (film)
Stronger Than Death (1920 film)
Susan Lenox (Her Fall and Rise)
Sweethearts (1938 film)
Tarzan the Ape Man (1932 film)
Tea for Three (film)
Teri Garr
The Adventurer (1928 film)
The Avenging Arrow
The Bachelor Father
The Beautiful Sinner
The Big Little Person
The Boss of Camp 4
The Bribe
The Bride's Awakening
The Cardboard Lover
The Clown (1953 film)
The Crippled Hand
The Cuban Love Song
The Delicious Little Devil
The Demi-Bride
The Desert's Price
The Destroying Angel
The Devil Is a Sissy
The Divorcee
The Eagle's Wings
The Feminine Touch (1941 film)
The Firefly (1937 film)
The French Doll
The Gentle Cyclone
The Gilded Lily (1921 film)
The Girl of the Golden West (1938 film)
The Great Diamond Robbery
The Great Ziegfeld
The Hawk's Trail
The Heart of the Yukon
The King's Thief
The Lady of the Dugout
The Land of Long Shadows
The Little Girl Next Door (1923 film)
The Love Girl
The Man from Down Under
The Master Key (1914 serial)
The Miracle Makers
The Miracle of Love (film)
The Muppet Show
The Pagan
The Plow Girl
The Primrose Ring (film)
The Prizefighter and the Lady
The Range Boss
The Restless Sex
The Ruby Circle (film)
The Scarlet Shadow
The Secret Heart
The Son-Daughter
The Thin Man (film)
The Timber Wolf
The Trail Rider
The Waltons
The Waning Sex
The Way of a Woman
They Gave Him a Gun
Third Finger, Left Hand (film)
Thoroughly Modern Millie (musical)
Time, the Comedian
Too Young to Kiss
Trader Horn (1931 film)
Turner Classic Movies
Under the Black Eagle
United States dollar
Victor Herbert
W. S. Van Dyke
Walter Kingsford
War Paint (1926 film)
We Were Dancing (film)
Week-End at the Waldorf
What Am I Bid?
When Ladies Meet (1933 film)
When Ladies Meet (1941 film)
White Eagle (1922 serial)
White Shadows in the South Seas
William Daniels (cinematographer)
Winner Take All (1924 film)
Winners of the Wilderness
Woodstock (Peanuts)
Woody Allen
Wyoming (1928 film)
Young Frankenstein
Zero Mostel
Ziegfeld Girl (film)
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1936
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/passions400.pdf
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/songs400.pdf
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/musicals_ballot.pdf
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v34652
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0026768/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/1127
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/naughty_marietta
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1246938#identifiers
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb164629137
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb164629137
https://viaf.org/viaf/305898310
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/341/enwp
https://www.bbfc.co.uk/release/naughty-marietta-q29sbgvjdglvbjpwwc0ynzc0mza
