Out of Africa (film)
Out of Africa is a 1985 American epic romantic drama film directed and produced by Sydney Pollack, and starring Meryl Streep and Robert Redford. The film is based loosely on the 1937 autobiographical book Out of Africa written by Isak Dinesen (the pseudonym of Danish author Karen Blixen), with additional material from Dinesen's 1960 book Shadows on the Grass and other sources.
The book was adapted into a screenplay by the writer Kurt Luedtke, and filmed in 1984. Streep played Karen Blixen, Redford played Denys Finch Hatton, and Klaus Maria Brandauer played Baron Bror Blixen. Others in the film include Michael Kitchen as Berkeley Cole, Malick Bowens as Farah, Stephen Kinyanjui as the Chief, Michael Gough as Lord Delamere, Suzanna Hamilton as Felicity, and the model and actress Iman as Mariammo. The film received generally positive reviews from critics. It was also a commercial success and won seven Academy Awards including Best Picture and Best Director for Pollack.


== Plot ==
Karen Blixen recalls her life in Africa, where she moved in 1913 as an unmarried, wealthy Dane.
After having been spurned by her Swedish nobleman lover, she asks his brother whom she is good friends with, Baron Bror Blixen, to marry out of mutual convenience, and they move to the vicinity of Nairobi, British East Africa.  Using her funds, he is to set up a dairy ranch, with her joining him a few months later, at which time they will marry. En route to Nairobi, her train is hailed by a big-game hunter named Denys Finch Hatton, who knows her fiancé and entrusts his haul of ivory to her.
She is greeted at the railway station by Farah, the Somali headman hired by Bror, who is nowhere to be found. She is taken to the recently founded Muthaiga Club. She enters the men-only salon to ask for her husband and, because of her gender, is asked to leave. Karen and Bror marry before the day is out, and she becomes Baroness Blixen.
She then learns that Bror has changed their agreed-upon plan and has spent her money to establish a coffee farm. She quickly learns that the farm is at too high an elevation to offer much of a chance of success. She needs Bror's help in building and managing this farm, but his interest is more in guiding game hunting safaris than in farming.
Karen comes to love Africa and the African people, and is taken in by the breathtaking view of the nearby Ngong Hills and the Great Rift Valley beyond. She looks after the Kikuyu people who are squatting on her land, establishes a school for them, helps with their medical needs, and arbitrates their disputes. Meanwhile, she also attempts to establish a formal European homelife on par with the other upper class colonists in the area. She becomes friends with a young woman, Felicity (whose character is based on a young Beryl Markham). Eventually, Karen and Bror's feelings for one another deepen and they consummate their marriage. However, despite his genuine feelings for Karen, Bror continues to pursue other sexual relationships.
As the First World War reaches East Africa, the colonists form a militia led by the colonial patriarch Lord Delamere, which includes Denys and Bror among their number. A military expedition sets out in search of the forces from the neighboring German colony of German East Africa. Responding to the militia's need for supplies, Karen leads a difficult expedition to find them and returns safely. Shortly after the end of the war, in the evenings, Karen makes up exotic and imaginative stories to entertain her visitors.
Karen discovers that Bror has given her syphilis. As she is unable to receive proper treatment in Nairobi, she returns to Denmark for treatment and recuperation. Bror agrees to manage the farm while she is away. When she returns, now unable to bear children, Bror resumes his safari work, and they begin to live separately.
The relationship between Karen and Denys develops, and he comes to live with her. Denys acquires a Gipsy Moth biplane and often takes Karen flying. Karen and Bror divorce when Bror finds another woman he wants to marry. This causes Karen to confront Denys regarding the status of their relationship which she would like to solidify, whereas he would rather maintain his autonomy. When Karen learns that Denys plans to take one of their female acquaintances, Felicity, on a private safari, she confronts Denys for not sharing her desire for a monogamous, domestic relationship. He assures her he wants to be with only her and states that a marriage is immaterial to how he feels about her. Eventually, this drives them apart and, refusing to meet Karen's ultimatum not to take Felicity flying, he moves out.
The farm eventually yields a good harvest, but a fire destroys much of the farm and factory, forcing her to sell out. She prepares for her departure from Kenya to Denmark by appealing to the incoming governor to provide land for her Kikuyu workers to allow them to stay together, and by selling most of her remaining possessions at a rummage sale.  Denys visits the now-empty house and Karen comments that the house should have been (empty) all-along and, as with her other efforts, the returning of things to their natural state is as it should be. Denys says that he was just getting used to her things and that he no longer feels comfortable alone now that he has realized his feelings for her have changed him. He asks to join her on her journey back to Mombasa.
As he is about to depart for a safari scouting trip in his airplane, they agree that the following Friday he will return and fly her to Mombasa; with Karen then continuing on to Denmark. Friday comes and Denys does not appear. Bror then arrives to tell her that Denys' biplane has crashed and burned in Tsavo.  During Denys' funeral, Karen recites an excerpt of a poem by A. E. Housman about a lauded athlete dying young who, as with Denys, is not fated to decline into old age. Later, as she is about to depart for good, she goes to the Muthaiga Club to complete arrangements for forwarding any mail. The members, having come to admire her, invite her into the men-only salon for a toast. At the railway station, she gives Farah the compass that Denys had given to her and says goodbye to Farah, then turns back to ask him to say her name, so she can hear his voice one last time. Later, Farah writes to Karen in Denmark, telling her that a pair of lions often visit Denys' grave.
As the movie ends, the on-screen narrative notes that Karen later became a published author under the pen name Isak Dinesen. Among her work is the memoir about her experiences in Africa, Out of Africa, the first line from which is used to introduce this film. She never returned to Africa.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
The film tells the story as a series of six loosely coupled episodes from Karen's life, intercut with her narration. The final two narrations, the first a reflection on Karen's experiences in Kenya and the second a description of Finch Hatton's grave, were taken from her book Out of Africa, while the others were written for the film in imitation of her very lyrical writing style. The pace of this film is often rather slow, reflecting Blixen's book, "Natives dislike speed, as we dislike noise..."Klaus Maria Brandauer was director Sydney Pollack's only choice for Bror Blixen, even having trouble to pick a replacement when it appeared that Brandauer's schedule would prevent him from participating. Robert Redford became Finch Hatton, with Pollack thinking Redford had a charm no British actor could convey. Meryl Streep landed the part by showing up for her meeting with the director wearing a low-cut blouse and a push-up bra, as Pollack had originally thought the actress did not have enough sex appeal for the role.Out of Africa was filmed using descendants of several people of the Kikuyu tribe who are named in the book, including the grandson of chief Kinyanjui who played his grandfather. Much of it was filmed in the Karen / Lang'ata area near the actual Ngong Hills outside Nairobi. The Chyulu Hills stood in for the less picturesque Ngong Hills. As Karen's farmhouse was at the time of filming a part of a local nursing school, the filming took place in her nearby first house "Mbogani", which is a dairy today. Her actual house, known as "Mbagathi" is now the Karen Blixen Museum. A substantial part of the filming took place in the Scott house and in a recreation of 1910s Nairobi built in an area of unoccupied land in Langata.
The scenes depicting the Government House were shot at Nairobi School with the administration block providing a close replica of British colonial governors' residences. The train sequences were filmed along a section of abandoned track some 97 km (60 mi) from Nairobi. The scenes set in Denmark were actually filmed in Surrey, England.


== Historical differences ==
Although bearing the name of Dinesen's book, the picture was actually taken from two other books (not written by her) as well.  It quotes the start of the Dinesen's book, "I had a farm in Africa, at the foot of the Ngong Hills" [p. 3], and Karen recites, "He prayeth well that loveth well both man and bird and beast" from The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, which becomes the epitaph inscribed on Finch Hatton's grave marker [p. 370].
The film omits much of Dinesen's book, such as a devastating locust swarm, some local shootings, and her writings about the German army. The production also plays down the size of her 4,000 acres (16 km2) farm, which had 800 Kikuyu workers and an 18-oxen wagon. Scenes show Karen as owning only one dog, but actually, she had two similar dogs named Dawn and Dusk.
The movie also takes liberties with Denys and Karen's romance. They met at a hunting club, not in the plains. Denys was away from Kenya for two years on military assignment in Egypt, which is not mentioned. Denys took up flying and began to lead safaris after he moved in with Karen. The film also ignores that Karen was pregnant at least once with Finch Hatton's child but suffered from miscarriages. Furthermore, Denys was an English aristocrat, but this fact was minimized by the hiring of the actor Robert Redford, an inarguably all-American actor who had previously worked with Pollack. When Redford accepted the contract to play, he did so fully intending to play him as an Englishman. Pollack, however, felt an English accent would be distracting for the audience, and told Redford to use his real accent. In fact, Redford reportedly had to re-record some of his lines from early takes in the filming, in which he still spoke with a trace of English accent.
The title scenes of the film show the main railway, from Mombasa to Nairobi, as traveling through the Kenyan Rift Valley, on the steep back side of the actual Ngong Hills. However, the real railway track is located on the higher, opposite side of the Ngong Hills. The passenger car was actually a small combination office/sleeper that was originally used by supervisors during the building of the Uganda Railway and was the actual car from which a man was taken and killed by a marauding lioness.


== Soundtrack ==
The music for Out of Africa was composed and conducted by veteran English composer John Barry. The score included a number of outside pieces such as Mozart's Clarinet Concerto and African traditional songs. The soundtrack garnered Barry an Oscar for Best Original Score and sits in fifteenth place in the American Film Institute's list of top 25 American film scores. The soundtrack was first released through MCA Records in 1985 and features 12 tracks of score at a running time of just over thirty-three minutes. In 1987 a Special Edition was issued that included the song "The Music of Goodbye (Love Theme)" by Melissa Manchester & Al Jarreau. A rerecording conducted by Joel McNeely and performed by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra was released in 1997 through Varèse Sarabande and features eighteen tracks of score at a running time just under thirty-nine minutes.


=== Charts ===


=== Certifications ===


== Technical notes ==
In the Director's Notes on the DVD of Pollack's 2005 film The Interpreter, Pollack himself stated that he filmed Out of Africa and his later films of that decade in 1.85:1 widescreen; and that it "...probably was one I should have had in widescreen" (i.e. anamorphic 2.39:1 widescreen). In his director's notes, Pollack stated that prior to the filming of Out of Africa, he made motion pictures exclusively in the anamorphic 2.39:1 widescreen format and style, and that he did not resume the anamorphic 2.39:1 widescreen format, due to the rise of pan and scan which had affected the compositions of many anamorphic movies, until his last movie, The Interpreter, in 2005.


== Release ==


=== Critical reception ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 62% based on 90 reviews, with an average rating of 6.90/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Though lensed with stunning cinematography and featuring a pair of winning performances from Meryl Streep and Robert Redford, Out of Africa suffers from excessive length and glacial pacing." Metacritic reports a score of 69 out of 100 based on 18 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film four stars out of four and called it "one of the great recent epic romances," adding, "What we have here is an old-fashioned, intelligent, thoughtful love story, told with enough care and attention that we really get involved in the passions among the characters." Vincent Canby of The New York Times described it as "a big, physically elaborate but wispy movie" with Redford's character "a total cipher, and a charmless one at that. It's not Mr. Redford's fault. There's no role for him to act." Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune gave the film two-and-a-half stars out of four and declared, "My basic problem with this otherwise sumptuous and well-acted film is that I never was able to accept Redford in character ... He seems distant to the point of distraction. He is not convincing in his period outfits. He looks and acts as if he just walked out of the safari fitting room at Abercrombie & Fitch." David Ansen of Newsweek wrote that the film was "well worth the wait," calling it "a sprawling but always intelligent romantic epic that depicts Karen Blixen's struggles to hold on to both the man and the land she loves and cannot possess."Sheila Benson of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the film "seems to be just the thing for famished culture mavens at Christmastime. Unfortunately, and through no fault of Meryl Streep, there doesn't seem to be enough electricity generated out there in Africa to power a love story 2½ hours long." Variety found that the film "rarely really comes to life except when Redford is around, which unfortunately is not often in the first hour," but once Streep and Redford get together it becomes "a wonderful romance, probably Redford's best since 'The Way We Were.'"Pauline Kael of The New Yorker described the film as "unsatisfying" and wrote that Streep is "animated in the early scenes; she's amusing when she acts ditsy, and she has some oddly affecting moments. Her character doesn't deepen though, or come to mean more to us, and Redford doesn't give out with anything for her to play against." Paul Attanasio of The Washington Post stated that the film "has little in the way of narrative drive" and "rarely seems more than an elevated form of tourism."Reviewing the film in 2009, James Berardinelli wrote, "Watching Out of Africa a quarter of a century after its release, it's almost impossible to guess how it won the Oscar for Best Picture ... Sydney Pollack's direction is quietly competent and the acting by Meryl Streep and Robert Redford is top notch. But the lazy story is little more than an ordinary melodrama that simmers without ever reaching a boil. To tell the truth, during the entirety of the movie's nearly three-hour running length, I was more interested in the scenery and Barry's music than I was in the characters."


=== Box office ===
The film was the fifth-highest grossing film of 1985 in the United States and Canada with a gross of $87 million. It grossed $227.5 million worldwide and was the second highest-grossing film in Germany with a gross of $23 million.


=== Accolades ===
American Film Institute lists:

2002 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions #13
2005 AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores #15


== References ==


== External links ==
Out of Africa at IMDb
Out of Africa at the TCM Movie Database
Out of Africa at AllMovie
Out of Africa at Box Office Mojo
Out of Africa at Rotten Tomatoes12 Years a Slave (film)
12th César Awards
1917 (2019 film)
1985 National Society of Film Critics Awards
1985 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
1985 in film
2001: A Space Odyssey (film)
38th Directors Guild of America Awards
38th Writers Guild of America Awards
40th British Academy Film Awards
43rd Golden Globe Awards
58th Academy Awards
A. E. Housman
A. R. Rahman
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions
AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Bug's Life (soundtrack)
A Heart in Winter
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Separation
A Star Is Born (1976 soundtrack)
A Walk in the Clouds (soundtrack)
Abercrombie & Fitch
Absence of Malice
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Awards
Aladdin (1992 soundtrack)
Alan Jay Lerner
Alan Menken
Alan and Marilyn Bergman
Alex Ebert
Alex North
Alexandre Desplat
AllMovie
All About Eve
All About My Mother
All Is Lost
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
Allee Willis
Amadeus (film)
Amazing Grace (2018 film)
American Beauty: Original Motion Picture Score
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Cinema Editors
American Cinema Editors Award for Best Edited Feature Film – Dramatic
American Film Institute
An American in Paris (film)
Anamorphic format
Anatomy of a Murder
Andreas Nicolai Hansen
Anecdotes of Destiny
Annabel Maule
Anne of the Thousand Days
Annie Hall
Antonio Sánchez (drummer)
Apocalypse Now
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Atonement (2007 film)
Atonement (soundtrack)
Atticus Ross
Au revoir les enfants
Australian Recording Industry Association
Avatar (2009 film)
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role
BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role
BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
BAFTA Award for Best Cinematography
BAFTA Award for Best Costume Design
BAFTA Award for Best Original Music
BAFTA Award for Best Sound
BMI Awards
Babel (film)
Babette's Feast
Babylon (soundtrack)
Beauty and the Beast (1991 soundtrack)
Becket (1964 film)
Belfast (film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Benny Young
Beryl Markham
Beverly Hills Cop (soundtrack)
Big-game hunter
Biplane
Birdman (film)
Birdman (film score)
Black Panther (soundtrack)
Bobby Deerfield
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Braveheart
Breakfast at Tiffany's: Music from the Motion Picture
Brian Easdale
Bridge of Spies (film)
British Phonographic Industry
British Society of Cinematographers
Brokeback Mountain
Bror von Blixen-Finecke
Bugsy
Burkhard Dallwitz
Burt Bacharach
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
CBS Interactive
CODA (2021 film)
Camelot (film)
Car Wash (soundtrack)
Carlos Rafael Rivera
Carmine Coppola
Casablanca (film)
Castle Keep
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Chariots of Fire
Chernobyl: Music from the Original TV Series
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Sun-Times
Chicago Tribune
Chinatown (1974 film)
Chris Jenkins (sound engineer)
Chyulu Hills
Cimarron (1931 film)
Clarinet Concerto (Mozart)
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Close Encounters of the Third Kind (soundtrack)
Cong Su
Craig Armstrong (composer)
Craig Krampf
Crash (2004 film)
Crimson Tide (film)
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (soundtrack)
Cyrano de Bergerac (1990 film)
César Award for Best Foreign Film
DVD
DVD Exclusive Awards
Dances with Wolves
Dances with Wolves (soundtrack)
Danny Sembello
Dario Marianelli
Dave Grusin
David Ansen
David Arnold
David Byrne
David Kent (historian)
David Watkin (cinematographer)
David di Donatello
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Actor
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Actress
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Director
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Film
De Havilland DH.60 Moth
Dead Poets Society
Denmark
Denys Finch Hatton
Dimitri Tiomkin
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Django Unchained
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Doctor Zhivago (soundtrack)
Dominic Frontiere
Donal McCann
Doug Cotler
Driving Miss Daisy
Duke Ellington
Dunkirk (2017 film)
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (soundtrack)
East Africa Protectorate
East of Eden (film)
Egypt
Ehrengard
Ellen Dahl
Elliot Goldenthal
Elmer Bernstein
Encanto (soundtrack)
Eneboerne
England
Ennio Morricone
Epic film
Ernest Gold
Errol Trzebinski
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Exodus (soundtrack)
Familien de Cats
Fandango Media
Fanny and Alexander
Film adaptation
First Man (soundtrack)
First World War
Flashdance
Flashdance (soundtrack)
Forrest Gump
Francis Ford Coppola
Francis Lai
Franz Waxman
Frederick Loewe
Fredric Steinkamp
Frida (soundtrack)
From Here to Eternity
Gabriel Yared
Gandhi (film)
Gary Alexander (sound engineer)
Gene Siskel
Gentleman's Agreement
George Harrison
Germaine Franco
German East Africa
Gigi (1958 film)
Giorgio Moroder
Gladiator (2000 film)
Gladiator (2000 soundtrack)
Glory (1989 film)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score
Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Goldene Leinwand
Gone with the Wind (film)
Gorillas in the Mist
Government Houses of the British Empire and Commonwealth
Graham Crowden
Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media
Gran Torino
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Great Rift Valley
Green Book (film)
Guess Who's Coming to Dinner
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hans Zimmer
Hans von Blixen-Finecke
Harold Faltermeyer
Havana (film)
Hawaii (1966 film)
Heaven & Earth (soundtrack)
Henry Mancini
Hereafter (film)
High Noon
Hildur Guðnadóttir
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Howard Hewett
Howard Shore
Hugh Cholmondeley, 3rd Baron Delamere
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
Iman (model)
In the Heat of the Night (film)
In the Name of the Father (film)
Independence Day (1996 film)
Ingeborg Westenholz
Inglourious Basterds
Irene Cara
Isaac Hayes
Isak Dinesen
It Happened One Night
James Berardinelli
James Horner
James Newton Howard
Japan Academy Film Prize
Japan Academy Prize for Outstanding Foreign Language Film
Jaws (soundtrack)
Jeremiah Johnson (film)
Jerry Hey
Jesus Christ Superstar (film)
Job Seda
Joel McNeely
John Addison
John Barry (composer)
John Lennon
John Williams
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Johnny Green
Johnny Mandel
Joker (soundtrack)
Jon Batiste
Jonathan Livingston Seagull (album)
Jonathan Livingston Seagull (film)
Joseph Aloysius Byrne
Joseph Plateau Award
Josie MacAvin
Judgment at Nuremberg
Judith Thurman
Justin Hurwitz
Jóhann Jóhannsson
Karen, Kenya
Karen Blixen
Karen Blixen Museum (Kenya)
Keith Forsey
Kenneth Ascher
Kent Music Report
Kenya Colony
Kenyan Rift Valley
Kikuyu people
Kim Carnes
Kim Jorgensen
Kitarō
Klaus Maria Brandauer
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kurt Luedtke
La La Land (soundtrack)
Lalo Schifrin
Lang'ata
Larry Stensvold
Last Tales
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leslie Phillips
Let It Be (Beatles album)
Life of Pi (soundtrack)
Life with Father (film)
Lisa Gerrard
List of music recording certifications
London Critics Circle Film Awards
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Cinematography
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards 1985
Los Angeles Times
Love Story (1970 film)
Ludovic Bource
Ludwig Göransson
MCA Records
Marathon Man (film)
Marty (film)
Marvin Hamlisch
Mary Poppins: Original Cast Soundtrack
Mary Westenholz
Maurice Jarre
Max Steiner
Memoirs of a Geisha (soundtrack)
Mephisto (1981 film)
Meryl Streep
Metacritic
Michael Boddicker
Michael Giacchino
Michael Gough
Michael Kitchen
Michael Sembello
Micki Free
Midnight Cowboy
Midnight Express (film)
Milena Canonero
Militia
Million Dollar Baby
Mirage Enterprises
Miscarriage
Mombasa
Moonlight (2016 film)
Motion picture
Moulin Rouge!
Mrs. Miniver
Music from Mission: Impossible
Music genre
Music of Dune (2021 film)
Music of The Lord of the Rings film series
Muthaiga Country Club
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
Mychael Danna
Nairobi
Nairobi School
Nashville (film)
Nastro d'Argento
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actor
National Board of Review Awards 1985
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actor
Neil Diamond
Nelly and Mr. Arnaud
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Cinematographer
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actor
Newsweek
Ngong Hills
Nino Rota
No Country for Old Men
Nocturnal Animals
Nomadland
Norman Whitfield
Oliver! (film)
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Beach (1959 film)
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Ordinary People
Out of Africa
Out of Africa (disambiguation)
Parasite (2019 film)
Patriarch
Patton (film)
Paul Attanasio
Paul McCartney
Paul Simon
Paul Williams (songwriter)
Pauline Kael
Pembroke Herring
Pembroke J. Herring
Peter Cobbin
Peter Handford
Phil Ramone
Philip Glass
Platoon (film)
Pløjeren
Prince (musician)
Productores de Música de España
Pulp Fiction
Purple Rain (album)
Push-up bra
Rachel Kempson
Raiders of the Lost Ark (soundtrack)
Rain Man
Raise the Red Lantern
Random Hearts
Randy Newman
Ratatouille (soundtrack)
Ray (soundtrack)
Rebecca (1940 film)
Recent African origin of modern humans
Record label
Recording Industry Association of America
Reginald Berkeley Cole
Review aggregator
Richard M. Sherman
Ridicule (film)
Ringo Starr
Robert B. Sherman
Robert Redford
Rocky
RogerEbert.com
Roger Ebert
Roma (2018 film)
Romance film
Rotten Tomatoes
Royal Scottish National Orchestra
Rummage sale
Rungstedlund
Ryan's Daughter
Ryuichi Sakamoto
Sabrina (1995 film)
Safari
Sandhedens hævn
Sant Jordi Awards
Saving Private Ryan
Saving Private Ryan (soundtrack)
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Schindler's List (soundtrack)
Sense and Sensibility (film)
September Affair
Seven Gothic Tales
Shaft (Isaac Hayes album)
Shakespeare in Love
Shandi Sinnamon
Shane Rimmer
Sharon Robinson (songwriter)
Sheila Benson
Sheldon Kahn
Sketches of Frank Gehry
Skyfall: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack
Slumdog Millionaire
Slumdog Millionaire: Music from the Motion Picture
Sociedad General de Autores y Editores
Somalis
Soul (soundtrack)
Soundtrack album
Spartacus (film)
Spotlight (film)
Star Wars: The Force Awakens (soundtrack)
Star Wars (soundtrack)
Stephen B. Grimes
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Sunset Boulevard (soundtrack)
Superman (1978 film)
Surrey
Suzanna Hamilton
Sydney Pollack
Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique
Syphilis
Tan Dun
Terms of Endearment
The Agony and the Ecstasy (film)
The Alamo (1960 film)
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Artist (soundtrack)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Aviator (soundtrack)
The Barbarian Invasions
The Beatles
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Cardinal
The Dark Knight: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Departed
The Descendants
The Dreamers (unfinished film)
The Electric Horseman
The Empire Strikes Back (soundtrack)
The English Patient (film)
The English Patient (soundtrack)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The Fabulous Baker Boys (Motion Picture Soundtrack)
The Fall of the Roman Empire (film)
The Firm (1993 film)
The French Connection (film)
The Full Monty
The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo (soundtrack)
The Godfather
The Godfather (soundtrack)
The Godfather Part II
The Graduate (soundtrack)
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Grand Budapest Hotel (soundtrack)
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Hateful Eight (soundtrack)
The Hours (film)
The Hurt Locker
The Immortal Story
The Inspector General (1949 film)
The Interpreter (2005 film)
The King's Speech
The King's Speech (soundtrack)
The Last Emperor
The Last Emperor (album)
The Legend of 1900 (soundtrack)
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion King (1994 soundtrack)
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Little Mermaid (1989 soundtrack)
The Little Prince (1974 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (soundtrack)
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Man Who Wasn't There (2001 film)
The Mission (soundtrack)
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Painted Veil (soundtrack)
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Prince and the Showgirl
The Queen's Gambit: Music from the Netflix Limited Series
The Red Shoes (1948 film)
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Revolution (band)
The Rime of the Ancient Mariner
The Robe (film)
The Sandpiper
The Scalphunters
The Shape of Water
The Shape of Water (soundtrack)
The Sheltering Sky (soundtrack)
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Slender Thread
The Social Network
The Social Network (soundtrack)
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sound of Music (film)
The Sting
The Stunt Man
The Taste of Others
The Theory of Everything (soundtrack)
The Towering Inferno
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Truman Show: Music from the Motion Picture
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Untouchables (film)
The Washington Post
The Way We Were
The Way We Were: Original Soundtrack Recording
The Wishing Tree (1976 film)
The Yakuza
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
This Property Is Condemned
Thomas Dinesen
Thomas Newman
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Three Days of the Condor
Titanic: Music from the Motion Picture
Titanic (1997 film)
To Kill a Mockingbird (film)
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tootsie
Toy Story 3 (soundtrack)
Train of Life
Trent Reznor
Tsavo
Turner Classic Movies
Uganda Railway
Unforgiven
Universal Pictures
Up (soundtrack)
Variety (magazine)
Varèse Sarabande
Victor Young
Vincent Canby
Wayback Machine
West Side Story (1961 film)
Widescreen
Wilhelm Dinesen
William Steinkamp
Wings (1927 film)
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
You Can't Take It with You (film)
http://www.filmtracks.com/titles/out_africa.html
http://www.filmtracks.com/
http://connect.afi.com/site/DocServer/scores250.pdf?docID=221
http://www.afi.com/
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1986
http://www.nation.co.ke/Features/DN2/The-thinking-behind-Nairobis--grand-schools-/-/957860/1625562/-/128vpwfz/-/index.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1985/11/29/movies/at-the-movies.html
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/36787/Out-of-Africa/awards
https://web.archive.org/web/20110716071543/http://connect.afi.com/site/DocServer/scores250.pdf?docID=221
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v36787
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/out_of_africa
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0089755/
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=outofafrica.htm
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/out-of-africa-1985
https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/packages/html/movies/bestpictures/africa-re.html?scp=3&sq=loews&st=cse
http://articles.latimes.com/1985-12-18/entertainment/ca-26572_1_africa-movie-settings
http://www.reelviews.net/reelviews/out-of-africa
http://www.mediafire.com/file/7q55521w7go6vh6/Spanish+Certifications+for+2000-2002.pdf
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/lifestyle/1985/12/20/out-of-africa-redford-38/a0147dd0-43c7-4d8c-ad6d-757602cee6f7/?noredirect=on
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/out-of-africa
http://snepmusique.com/les-certifications/?categorie=Albums&interprete=B.O.F&titre=Out+of+Africa
https://books.google.com/books?id=UCQEAAAAMBAJ&q=out+of+africa+soundtrack+billboard&pg=PA68
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q208266#identifiers
https://authority.bibsys.no/authority/rest/authorities/html/8008210
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX3960488
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb16462529h
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb16462529h
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4227903-3
https://viaf.org/viaf/316751612
https://web.archive.org/web/20120217043507/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/36787/Out-of-Africa/awards
https://www.riaa.com/gold-platinum/?tab_active=default-award&ar=John+Barry&ti=Out+of+Africa&format=Album&type=#search_section
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058515806306706
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/19122/enwp
https://www.bpi.co.uk/award/11298-1140-2
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/n85360977
