Parasite (2019 film)
Parasite (Korean: 기생충; Hanja: 寄生蟲; RR: Gisaengchung) is a 2019 South Korean black comedy thriller film directed by Bong Joon-ho, who co-wrote the screenplay with Han Jin-won and co-produced. The film, starring Song Kang-ho, Lee Sun-kyun, Cho Yeo-jeong, Choi Woo-shik, Park So-dam, Jang Hye-jin, Park Myung-hoon and Lee Jung-eun, follows a poor family who scheme to become employed by a wealthy family, infiltrating their household by posing as unrelated, highly qualified people.
The script is based on Bong's source material from a play written in 2013. He later adapted it into a 15-page film draft, and Han split it into three different drafts. Bong said he was inspired by the 1960 Korean film The Housemaid and by the Christine and Léa Papin incident in the 1930s. Filming began in May 2018 and finished that September. The project included cinematographer Hong Kyung-pyo, film editor Yang Jin-mo, and composer Jung Jae-il. Darcy Paquet, an American film critic and author, provided English translations for the film's international release.
Parasite premiered at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival on 21 May 2019, where it became the first Korean film to win its top prize, the Palme d'Or. It was released in South Korea by CJ Entertainment on 30 May, and was praised for Bong's direction and screenplay, and also for its editing and production design. It grossed over $263 million worldwide on a $15.5 million budget. 
Among its numerous accolades, Parasite won a leading four Academy Awards at the 92nd Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best International Feature Film, becoming the first non-English-language film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture. It is the first South Korean film to receive any Academy Award recognition, and one of only three films overall to win both the Palme d'Or and the Academy Award for Best Picture, the first such achievement in over 60 years. It won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film and the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language, and became the first non-English-language film to win the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture. It has since been cited as among the best films of the 2010s, the 21st century, and of all time. A television series based on it is in early development.


== Plot ==
The Kim family lives in a semi-basement flat (banjiha) in Seoul, have low-income jobs, and struggle for money. Min-hyuk, a university student, gives the family a scholar's rock meant to promise wealth. Leaving to study abroad, he suggests that the Kims' son, Ki-woo, pose as a university student to take over his job as an English language tutor for Da-hye, the daughter of the rich Park family. After his sister Ki-jung helps create a false certificate for him in Photoshop, Ki-woo, posing as a Yonsei University student, is hired by the Parks.
The Kims scheme to get each of them a job with the Parks. Ki-woo recommends "Jessica", actually his sister Ki-jung, as an art therapist for the Parks' young son, Da-song, who has been traumatised after seeing a "ghost" in their kitchen. Ki-jung frames Yoon, Mr Park's chauffeur, by making it appear he had a sexual encounter in the car, then recommends her relatives' chauffeur, in actuality her father, Ki-taek, to take his place. The Kims exploit the peach allergy of the Parks' longtime housekeeper, Moon-gwang, to convince Mrs Park that she has tuberculosis, and the Kim matriarch, Chung-sook, is hired as her replacement. Ki-woo begins a secret romantic relationship with Da-hye.
When the Parks take a camping trip, the Kims revel in the luxuries of the house. Moon-gwang appears at the door, telling Chung-sook she left something in the basement. She goes through a hidden entrance to an underground bunker created by the architect and previous homeowner (who was too embarrassed to inform the Parks of its existence). There, Moon-gwang's husband, Geun-sae, is revealed to be living in the bunker while hiding from loan sharks; he is also revealed to be the "ghost" Da-song saw attempting to come out of the bunker to steal groceries from the Parks' refrigerator. Chung-sook refuses Moon-gwang's pleas to allow Geun-sae to remain in the bunker in exchange for regular payments, but the three other eavesdropping Kims accidentally reveal themselves to be related. Moon-gwang videotapes them on her phone, inadvertently revealing their deception, and threatens to expose them to the Parks.
The Parks call to say that they are returning early due to a severe rainstorm. The Kims subdue Moon-gwang and Geun-sae, tying them up and hiding them in the bunker. Ki-jung, Ki-taek, and Ki-woo hide under a table, and overhear Mr Park's comments about Ki-taek's odor, one he associates with lower-class people. The Kims eventually escape, but the torrential rain floods their flat with sewer water, forcing them to take shelter in a gymnasium with other, similarly displaced people.
The next day, Mrs Park hosts a house party for Da-song's birthday with the elder Kims' assistance; the younger Kims are invited as guests. Ki-woo enters the bunker with his scholar's rock to kill Geun-sae and Moon-gwang. Moon-gwang is already dead from a concussion she received during the previous day's brawl, but Ki-woo is attacked by Geun-sae, who uses the rock to knock Ki-woo out, leaving him lying in a pool of blood in the basement. Geun-sae then stabs Ki-jung with a kitchen knife in front of the horrified guests. Da-song suffers another seizure upon seeing Geun-sae again. Geun-sae and Chung-sook grapple with each other; she fatally impales him with a barbecue skewer. While Ki-taek tends to Ki-jung, Mr Park orders him to drive Da-song to the hospital. In the chaos, Ki-taek, upon seeing Mr Park's disgusted reaction to Geun-sae's odor, angrily kills him with the knife, then flees.
Weeks later, Ki-woo is recovering from brain surgery. He and Chung-sook are convicted of fraud and put on probation. Ki-jung has died from her injury, and Ki-taek has disappeared. Geun-sae is assumed to have been a homeless man, and neither his nor Ki-taek's motive for the murders are known. Ki-woo spies on the Parks' former home, now owned by a German family, and sees a message in Morse code from a kitchen light. Ki-taek, hiding in the bunker, has buried Moon-gwang in the garden and sends the message every day, hoping Ki-woo will see it. Still living in their basement flat with his mother, Ki-woo writes a letter to Ki-taek, vowing to earn enough money to buy the house and free him.


== Cast ==
Song Kang-ho as Kim Ki-taek (Mr Kim; 김기택; Gim Gitaek), the Kim family father who is hired as Park Dong-ik's chauffeur
Lee Sun-kyun as Park Dong-ik (Nathan; 박동익; Bak Dongik), the Park family father
Cho Yeo-jeong as Choi Yeon-gyo (Madame; 최연교; Choe Yeongyo), the Park mother
Choi Woo-shik as Kim Ki-woo (Kevin; 김기우; Gim Giu), the Kims' son who is hired as Da-hye's English tutor (Choi said the character is "intelligent but does not have the vigor needed to succeed in examinations")
Park So-dam as Kim Ki-jung (Jessica; 김기정; Gim Gijeong), the Kims' daughter who is hired as Da-song's art therapist
Jang Hye-jin as Chung-sook (박충숙; Bak Chungsuk), the Kim family mother who is hired as the Parks' housekeeper
Lee Jung-eun as Gook Moon-gwang (국문광; Guk Mungwang), the Parks' housekeeper, who also worked for the house's architect and previous owner (Bong Joon-ho said her relationship with the architect and parts of her story "that happen in between the sequences in the film" will be explored in the spin-off TV series)
Park Myung-hoon as Oh Geun-sae (오근세; O Geunse), Moon-gwang's husband
Jung Ji-so as Park Da-hye (박다혜; Bak Dahye), the Parks' daughter
Jung Hyeon-jun as Park Da-song (박다송; Bak Dasong), the Parks' son
Park Keun-rok as Yoon (윤; Yun), Park Dong-ik's chauffeur
Park Seo-joon as Min-hyuk (민혁; Minhyeok), Ki-woo's friend
Jung Yi-seo as a pizza parlour owner


== Production ==


=== Development ===
The idea for Parasite originated in 2013. While working on Snowpiercer, Bong was encouraged by a theater actor friend to write a play. He had been a tutor for the son of a wealthy family in Seoul in his early 20s and considered turning his experience into a stage production. The film's title, Parasite, was selected by Bong as it served a double meaning, and he had to convince the film's marketing group to use it. He said: "Because the story is about the poor family infiltrating and creeping into the rich house, it seems very obvious that Parasite refers to the poor family, and I think that's why the marketing team was a little hesitant. But if you look at it the other way, you can say that rich family, they're also parasites in terms of labor. They can't even wash dishes, they can't drive themselves, so they leech off the poor family's labor. So both are parasites."


=== Writing ===
After completing Snowpiercer, Bong wrote a 15-page film treatment for the first half of Parasite, which his production assistant on Snowpiercer, Han Jin-won, turned into three different drafts of the screenplay. After finishing Okja, Bong returned to the project and finished the script. Han is credited as a co-writer.Bong said the film was influenced by the 1960 Korean "domestic Gothic" film The Housemaid, in which a middle-class family's stability is threatened by a disruptive interloper in the form of household help. The incident of Christine and Léa Papin—two live-in maids who murdered their employers in 1930s France—also inspired him. Bong had also tutored for a rich family himself. He said: "I got this feeling that I was infiltrating the private lives of complete strangers. Every week I would go into their house, and I thought how fun it would be if I could get all my friends to infiltrate the house one by one." Additionally, Moon-gwang's allergy to peaches was inspired by one of Bong's university friends having this allergy.Darcy Paquet, an American residing in South Korea, translated the English subtitles, writing directly with Bong. Paquet rendered Jjapaguri or Chapaguri, a dish cooked by a character in the film, as ram-don, meaning ramen-udon. It is a mix of Chapagetti and Neoguri produced by Nongshim. The English version of the film shows packages labeled in English "ramyeon" and "udon" to highlight to English speakers how the name was created. Paquet believed the word ram-don did not previously exist as he found no results on Google. On one occasion, Paquet used Oxford University as a reference instead of Seoul National University, and in another, used WhatsApp as the messaging application instead of KakaoTalk. Paquet chose Oxford over Harvard because of Bong's affinity for the United Kingdom, and because Paquet believed using Harvard would be "too obvious". Paquet wrote, "In order for humor to work, people need to understand it immediately. With an unfamiliar word, the humor is lost."


=== Filming ===
Principal photography for Parasite began on 18 May 2018 and ended on 19 September. Filming took place around Seoul and in Jeonju. The director of photography was Hong Kyung-pyo, a well-known South Korean cinematographer who had worked with other well-known directors.


==== The Parks' house ====
The Parks' house was a specially constructed set. The ground floor and the garden were constructed on an empty outdoor lot, while the basement and first floor were constructed on set. "We built the main floor of the house in a backlot and for the second floor it was all green screen outside", explained editor Yang Jin-mo. "When we shot toward the outside from inside, everything beyond the garden was all VFX."As part of the scripting, Bong also designed the home's basic layout. "It's like its own universe inside this film. Each character and each team has spaces that they take over, that they can infiltrate, and also secret spaces that they don't know." A fictional architect, Namgoong Hyeonja, was created as the home's designer and previous owner, and production designer Lee Ha-jun considered the house's form and function based on how Namgoong would design it. It was designed and constructed to be not only beautiful but "a stage that served the precise needs of his camera, compositions, and characters, while embodying his film's rich themes".Lee said, "Since Mr Park's house is built by an architect in the story, it wasn't easy finding the right approach to designing the house...I'm not an architect, and I think there's a difference in how an architect envisions a space and how a production designer does. We prioritize blocking and camera angles while architects build spaces for people to actually live in and thus design around people. So I think the approach is very different." For example, Ha-jun established that Namgoong would have used the first floor's living room to appreciate the garden, so it was built with a single wide window and only spartan seating options for this function. Some of the interior artwork in the house sets were by South Korean artist Seung-mo Park, including existing artwork of hers and some created for the film. The team designed the home and interiors to make the set amenable for filming at the 2.35:1 aspect ratio, favoring wide and deep rooms rather than height.Lee said the sun was an important factor when building the outdoor set. "The sun's direction was a crucial point of consideration while we were searching for outdoor lots", he said. "We had to remember the sun's position during our desired time frame and determine the positions and sizes of the windows accordingly. In terms of practical lighting, the DP [Hong Kyung-pyo] had specific requests regarding the color. He wanted sophisticated indirect lighting and the warmth from tungsten light sources. Before building the set, the DP and I visited the lot several times to check the sun's movement each time, and we decided on the set's location together".


==== The Kims' flat ====
The Kims' semi-basement flat and its street were also built on set, partially out of necessity for the flooding scenes. Lee Ha-jun visited and photographed several abandoned villages and towns in South Korea scheduled to be torn down to help inform the set design. He also created stories for the Kims' neighbors and added details of those residents along the street to improve the authenticity of the street's appearance.


=== Editing ===
According to editor Yang Jin-mo, Bong chose to shoot the film without traditional coverage. To give them more editing options with limited shots, they sometimes stitched together different takes of the same shot. Yang edited the film using Final Cut Pro 7, a program not updated since 2011.The film was produced for release in color. A black and white version was produced before the world premiere in Cannes, debuted on 26 January 2020 at the International Film Festival Rotterdam, and was re-screened from 29 to 31 January. It also received a limited release in some countries.


=== Music ===

The score, by South Korean composer Jung Jae-il, consisted of "minimalist piano pieces, punctuated with light percussion", setting the film's "tense atmosphere". It also had a baroque texture with excerpts from Handel's opera Rodelinda and the 1964 Italian song "In ginocchio da te" by Gianni Morandi. It was recorded mostly through computer sounds.The soundtrack was published and released in Korea, in digital and physical formats, by Genie Music and Stone Music Entertainment on 30 May 2019. Internationally, it was released on 11 October 2019 by Milan Records. It was released in English titles, but the names and nouns are different from the English subtitles as translated by Paquet. On 14 February 2020, it was released in double-vinyl by Sacred Bones Records (a division of American film production company Neon) and Waxwork Records, in multicolor variants.An original song, "Soju han jan" (Korean: 소주 한 잔, lit. 'A glass of soju'), written by Bong and performed by Choi Woo-shik, who plays Ki-woo, is heard during the film's end credits. For marketing the soundtrack's international digital releases, the song was displayed in English as "Soju One Glass" [sic]; it was later changed to a grammatically correct title to be shortlisted for the Best Original Song category at the 92nd Academy Awards.


== Themes and interpretations ==

The main themes of Parasite are class conflict, social inequality and wealth disparity. Film critics and Bong Joon-ho himself have considered the film as a reflection of late-stage capitalism, and some have associated it with the term "Hell Joseon" (Korean: 헬조선), a satirical phrase that posits that living in hell would be akin to living in modern South Korea. This term came about due to high rates of youth unemployment, the intense demands of pursuing higher education, the crisis of home affordability, and the increasing socioeconomic gap between the wealthy and poor. In Coronavirus Capitalism Goes to the Cinema, Nulman writes that the word "parasite" originally referred to a "person who eats at the table of another", which occurs in one scene of the film. Nulman also notes the connection between parasites and the Karl Marx quote: The capitalist… is only capital personified. His soul is the soul of capital. But capital has one sole driving force, the drive to valorize itself, to create surplus-value, to make its constant part, the means of production, absorb the greatest possible amount of surplus labor. Capital is dead labor which, vampire-like, lives only by sucking living labor, and lives the more, the more labor it sucks. The film also analyses the use of connections and qualifications to get ahead, for rich and poor families alike. Some argue that its discussion of class relates to Pierre Bourdieu's concept of habitus.Bong has referred to Parasite as an upstairs/downstairs or "stairway movie", in which staircases are used as a motif to represent the positions of the families in the homes of the Kims and the Parks, as well as the basement bunker. The Kims' semi-basement apartment is typical for poorer Seoul residents due to its lower rent, despite having issues such as mold and increased risk of disease. Monsoon floods such as the one depicted in the film commonly damage these types of residences the most. The film presents class in spatial terms that speak to hierarchy, according to Nulman.According to Bong, the ending implies that Ki-woo will not be able to earn the funds needed to buy the house, as the final shot shows him still in the basement flat and recalls the first scene; he described this shot as a "surefire kill" (확인사살), referring to a coup de grace to ensure death. The ending song refers to Ki-woo working to make money to get the house. Choi Woo-shik estimated that it would take approximately 564 years for Ki-woo to earn enough money to purchase the house. Nevertheless, he was optimistic: "I'm pretty sure Ki-woo is one of those bright kids. He'll come up with some idea, and he would just go into the German family's house, and I think he will rescue his father". But on many interpretations, this dream subscribes to a bootstrapping mentality and is unlikely to be achieved; furthermore, "it does not address the fundamental problem at hand. Even in this fantasy scenario, Ki-taek would still be contained in the house by a legal system that would seek his prosecution and imprisonment. The forces that created and upheld the Kim family's separation would not be undone, merely adapted to".Critics have also considered the themes of colonialism and imperialism. According to Ju-Hyun Park, the film plays out within "the capitalist economic order inaugurated and upheld in Korea by colonial occupation", and the use of English in the film denotes prestige within that system. Park Da-song is obsessed with "Indians" and owns Native American-themed toys and inauthentic replicas. Nulman makes the link between the "native" Park family and the invaders: the Kims, who bring with them deadly parasites to which the natives have no immunity. Nulman points to the miasma theory of scent carrying disease: it was thought that natives could catch diseases just by smelling the noxious air carried by colonising Spaniards. This connects to the film's theme around the class distinction of smell. Bong has noted: "I wouldn't go so far as to say it's a commentary on what happened in the United States, but it's related in the sense that this family starts infiltrating the house and they already find a family living there. So you could say it's a joke in that context. But at the same time, the Native Americans have a very complicated and long, deep history. But in this family, that story is reduced to a young boy's hobby and decoration. The boy's mother mentions the tent as a US imported good, and I think it's like the Che Guevara T-shirts that people wear. They don't know the life of the revolutionary figure, they just think it's a cool T-shirt. That's what happens in our current time: the context and meaning behind these actual things only exists as a surface-level thing".Some critics note the importance of working-class solidarity as presented in the film. The Kims' problems are a result of lack of class solidarity with the other poor family, Geun-sae and Moon-gwang. At the film's climax, Ki-taek becomes aware of his class identity when Mr Park is disgusted by Geun-sae's smell. Others said Parasite revealed the misfortunes of poor, powerless victims of an indifferent world who are transformed into liberation through the comical effect of mass slaughter.


== Release ==


=== Theatrical ===
Neon acquired the US and Canadian rights to the film at the 2018 American Film Market. The film's rights were also pre-sold to German-speaking territories (Koch Films), French-speaking territories (The Jokers) and Japan (Bitters End). The film had its world premiere at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival on 21 May. It was released in South Korea on 30 May 2019.It was released in Australia and New Zealand by Madman Films on 27 June 2019 (becoming both the highest-ever-grossing Korean film in the region and the distributor's highest-ever-grossing non-English-language film in Australia). It screened at the Toronto International Film Festival in Toronto, Canada, in September 2019 and was released generally in the US and Canada on 11 October 2019. The film was originally scheduled to be screened as a closing film at FIRST International Film Festival Xining in China on 28 July 2019, but on 27 July, the film festival organisers announced that the screening was cancelled for "technical reasons".It was licensed for the United Kingdom and Ireland by Curzon Artificial Eye at Cannes, and had preview screenings in cinemas nationwide with an interview with Bong shared live by satellite on 3 February 2020, followed by the film's general release on 7 February.Neon expanded the number of North American cinemas showing the film from 1,060 to 2,001 starting the weekend of 14 February 2020, following the film's recognition at the Academy Awards, despite the film having already been released on home video in the region. A special IMAX remaster was shown at limited North American theatres during the week of 21 February 2020.


=== Home media ===
By December 2019, the film had earned a net revenue of $90 million from home entertainment, television and international sales. On 28 January 2020, Parasite was released on Blu-ray and DVD by Neon, with distribution by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment, and on 2 June it was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray. On 13 February 2020, it was announced that the film will be released on home media by The Criterion Collection. On 15 July 2020, The Criterion Collection announced the release date of 27 October 2020, featuring the long-awaited black-and-white version.On 24 February 2020, the subscription-based streaming service Hulu announced that it had secured exclusive rights to stream the film in the US, starting on 8 April 2020. Amazon Prime Video began streaming the film outside the US on 28 March 2020. In the UK, it was 2020's best-selling foreign language film on physical home video formats.


=== Black and white edition ===
A special monochrome version of the film, Parasite: Black-and-White Edition, had its world premiere at the International Film Festival Rotterdam in January 2020 and was released in cinemas in some cities in the United States in the same month.It was released on 24 July 2020 in the UK and Ireland by Curzon Artificial Eye in cinemas and on-demand simultaneously, and was released on 27 October 2020, in the US and Canada by The Criterion Collection on DVD and Blu-ray Disc, as part of their special edition re-release. The black and white transfer of the film was overseen by Bong and cinematographer Hong Kyung-pyo.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Parasite grossed $71.4 million in South Korea, $53.4 million in the US and Canada, and $133.9 million in other countries, for a worldwide total of $258.7 million. It set a new record for Bong, becoming the first of his films to gross over $100 million worldwide. Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit as $46.2 million.In South Korea, Parasite grossed $20.7 million on its opening weekend. It closed its box-office run with $72.2 million and more than 10 million admissions, equal to roughly one-fifth of the country's population and ranking first among the year's top five films.In the film's US opening weekend, it grossed $376,264 from three cinemas. Its per-venue average of $125,421 was the best since La La Land's in 2016, and the best ever for an international film. It expanded to 33 cinemas in its second weekend, making $1.24 million, and then made $1.8 million from 129 cinemas in its third. The film made $2.5 million in its fourth weekend and $2.6 million in its fifth. Its initial showings count peaked in its sixth weekend at 620, when it made $1.9 million. It continued to hold well over the following weekends, making $1.3 million and then $1 million.In its tenth week of release the film crossed the $20 million mark (rare for an international film), making $632,500 from 306 cinemas. During the weekend of the Oscars, the film made $1.5 million from 1,060 cinemas for a running total of $35.5 million. After Neon's doubling of showings in the week after the Academy Awards, the film made $5.5 million in revenue from the US and Canada, one of the largest Best Picture bumps since Slumdog Millionaire in 2009 and the largest in ten years.On 5 February, Parasite became the first Korean film in nearly 15 years to surpass one million moviegoers in Japan. In the UK, it broke the record for the opening weekend of a non-English-language film, making £1.4 million ($1.8 million) including previews over its debut weekend, from 135 screens, and in Australia it took in over $1.9 million. In the weekend after its Oscars wins, it made $12.8 million from 43 countries, bringing its international total to $161 million and its global running gross to over the $200 million mark.Following its Academy Awards success, Parasite received significant rescreening, generating significant further revenue. The Associated Press reported the biggest "Oscar effect" since 2001 after Gladiator won Best Picture. Parasite's box office revenue increased by more than 230% compared to the prior week, grossing $2.15 million in a single day. It also ranked No. 1 in Japan, the first Korean film to do so in 15 years. The Motion Picture Distributors Association of Australia announced that $749K worth of cinema tickets were sold in a single weekend, with the film reentering the top 10 at the local box office more than six months after it debuted in Australian cinemas. Parasite also surged back to fourth place in South Korea's box office by attracting more than 80,000 viewers.


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, Parasite has an approval rating of 99% based on 483 reviews, with an average rating of 9.4/10. The website's critics consensus reads: "An urgent, brilliantly layered look at timely social themes, Parasite finds writer-director Bong Joon Ho in near-total command of his craft." On Metacritic, 52 compiled reviews from critics were identified as positive, giving the film a weighted average score of 96 out of 100, indicating "universal acclaim". On the same site, Parasite was rated the best film of 2019 and ranked 7th among the films with the highest scores of the decade. As of 20 November 2021, it is the 48th-highest-rated film of all time on the website.Writing for The New York Times, A. O. Scott called the film "wildly entertaining, the kind of smart, generous, aesthetically energized movie that obliterates the tired distinctions between art films and popcorn movies". Bilge Ebiri of Vulture magazine wrote that Parasite is "a work that is itself in a state of constant, agitated transformation—a nerve-racking masterpiece whose spell lingers long after its haunting final image". In his five-star review, Dave Calhoun of Time Out praised the film's social commentary, calling the work "surprising and fully gripping from beginning to end, full of big bangs and small wonders". Variety's Jessica Kiang called the film "a wild, wild ride", writing that "Bong is back and on brilliant form, but he is unmistakably, roaringly furious, and it registers because the target is so deserving, so enormous, so 2019: Parasite is a tick fat with the bitter blood of class rage". Joshua Rivera of GQ gave a glowing review and declared Parasite possibly one of the best films of 2019.Michael Wood writing for the London Review of Books found its following a theme of class consciousness to be consistent with Snowpiercer: "The theme of social ascent, or social difference as a landscape, could hardly be more obvious, but we are beginning to get the movie's idea: not to avoid stereotypes but to keep crashing into them". UK film website TheShiznit awarded it an A, noting "it makes you wonder what the inflection point for such behaviour is in a culture where manners and servitude are drilled into those who can't afford not to have them". The A.V. Club's A. A. Dowd awarded the film an A−, praising the fun and surprising twists.Parasite ranked first in a survey by IndieWire of over 300 critics, in the Best Film, Best Director, Best Screenplay and Best Foreign Film categories. It also appeared on over 240 critics' year-end top-ten lists, including 77 who ranked it first.


== Accolades ==

Parasite won the Palme d'Or at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival. It became the first South Korean film to do so, as well as the first film to win with a unanimous vote since Blue Is the Warmest Colour at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival. At the 77th Golden Globe Awards, the film was nominated for three awards, including Best Director and Best Screenplay, and won Best Foreign Language Film, becoming the first South Korean film to achieve that feat.It became the second international film to ever be nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture since Life Is Beautiful (1997), and ultimately won the category, making it the first international film to win the prize. Parasite was also nominated for four awards at the 73rd British Academy Film Awards—Best Film, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Film Not in the English Language, being the first South Korean film to receive nominations other than for Best Film Not in the English Language, and went on to win Best Original Screenplay and Best Film Not in the English Language.Parasite was submitted as the South Korean entry for Best International Feature Film for the 92nd Academy Awards, making the December shortlist. It went on to win four awards—Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best International Feature Film. Parasite became the first non-English language film in Academy Awards history to win Best Picture. Parasite also became the first South Korean film to be nominated for Best Picture at the Academy Awards and the second East Asian film to receive a nomination for Best Picture since Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000), and Bong Joon-ho became the fourth Asian to receive an Academy Award nomination for Best Director, becoming the second to win, after Ang Lee. It also received nominations for Best Film Editing and Best Production Design. The film is also the second film to win both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Palme d'Or at Cannes under the latter's name in 65 years since Marty, being the third film to win both grand prizes after the former and The Lost Weekend.At the 56th Grand Bell Awards, Parasite earned a leading 11 nominations, with five wins (the most for the show): Best Film, Best Director (for Bong), Best Supporting Actress (for Lee Jung-eun), Best Screenplay (for Bong and Han Jin-Won), and Best Music (for Jung Jae-il).

During Bong's acceptance speech at the Oscars, he paused to thank Martin Scorsese, a co-nominated director, whom Bong recognised as having historical importance to the history of filmmaking, which resulted in spontaneous applause from the audience. The next day, Scorsese sent Bong a congratulatory letter, which Bong reported while on a speaking engagement at the Film at Lincoln Center, though Bong said he could not share the full letter due to its personal nature. He did, however, share the conclusion of the letter, saying that Scorsese told him, "You've done well. Now rest. But don't rest for too long." Bong then added that Scorsese ended his letter by saying "how he and other directors were waiting for my next movie".The Associated Press commented that although the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) had previously failed to adequately recognise women filmmakers in the Academy Award nominations, this time it acknowledged diversity. The Wall Street Journal also wrote that the film seemed to promise a "more inclusive Oscars" demanded by those who have previously criticised AMPAS. The AP noted that the film's victory, as an Oscar-winning foreign film in a regular Academy category, opened the door for Hollywood to undergo a radical change and a different kind of advancement, as a skeptic worried that if "Parasite won the Oscar for best international film, it probably wouldn't win any other major awards". "The academy gave best picture to the actual best picture", wrote Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times, adding that the film awards body was "startled ... into recognizing that no country's cinema has a monopoly on greatness". In 2021, the Writers Guild of America ranked Parasite's screenplay the fourth-greatest of the 21st century so far.On 28 March 2023, Cannes Film Festival president Thierry Frémaux revealed that after Everything Everywhere All at Once, a 2022 science fiction comedy-drama also featuring a predominantly Asian cast, won the Best Picture Oscar at the 95th Academy Awards, he began to question whether the Best Picture win for Parasite was worthy enough, saying "How can a non-American film win the Oscar for best film since it's a ceremony in honor of American cinema? Parasite won, it's great, but it's a Korean film."


== Legacy ==


=== Spin-off television series ===
A six-hour HBO limited series based on the film, with Bong and Adam McKay as executive producers, was announced to be in early development in January 2020. Bong has said that this will also be titled Parasite, and will explore stories "that happen in between the sequences in the film". In February 2020, Mark Ruffalo was rumoured to star and Tilda Swinton was confirmed as being cast in a lead role. But in October 2022, Swinton announced she was no longer involved with the series.


=== Plans for tourist set ===
A South Korean local government (Goyang City) plans to restore the Goyang Aqua Special Shooting Studio set, where Parasite was produced, and use it as a Parasite movie experience tourism facility. In addition, Goyang City has announced that it will invest $150 million in the development of the Goyang Film Culture Complex by 2026 to accommodate film experience tourism facilities, additional indoor studios, outdoor set production facilities, inter-Korean video content centers, image research and development companies. Criticism has been made about the commercialisation of areas known for poverty in South Korea as tourist destinations without concrete steps being taken to address the issues.


=== City tourism and food ===
The Seoul Tourism Organization (STO) has been criticised by South Korea's opposition party and residents of Seoul for introducing a tour route featuring filming locations and stories from the film. The Justice Party claims that it became famous due to the universal recognition of global inequality, but sees the development of a tourist attraction based on the film in Seoul as further exploitation of poverty. Residents of Parasite's filming locations have reportedly complained of a sense of embarrassment and discomfort due to an increase in tourists visiting their neighborhoods and taking photos of their surroundings, making them feel like "monkeys in a zoo". In response, the local government of Seoul has announced that government funding will prioritise the estimated 1,500 low-income families living in the semi-basement type accommodations featured in the film.People began posting videos on how to make jjapaguri (called "ram-don" in the film's English subtitles) on YouTube after the film was distributed. Nongshim, the manufacturer of Chapagetti and Neoguri, also began distributing a singular "Chapaguri" product due to the combination's popularity from the film.


== Bibliography ==
Botz-Bornstein, Thorsten; Stamatellos, Giannis (2022). Parasite: A Philosophical Exploration. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-51562-8.


== See also ==
List of South Korean submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film
List of submissions to the 92nd Academy Awards for Best International Feature Film


== Explanatory notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Australia and New Zealand official site Archived 19 July 2020 at archive.today
United States and Canada official site Archived 19 July 2020 at archive.today
United Kingdom and Ireland official site Archived 19 July 2020 at archive.today
Script Archived 9 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine
Parasite at AllMovie 
Parasite at HanCinema 
Parasite at IMDb 
Parasite at the Korean Movie Database  (in English)
Parasite: Notes from the Underground an essay by Inkoo Kang at the Criterion Collection12 Years a Slave (film)
1917 (2019 film)
1987: When the Day Comes
2001: A Space Odyssey (film)
2013 Cannes Film Festival
2019 Cannes Film Festival
2046 (film)
301, 302
4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days
56th Grand Bell Awards
73rd British Academy Film Awards
77th Golden Globe Awards
8½
92nd Academy Awards
95th Academy Awards
A. O. Scott
AACTA International Award for Best Film
A Barefoot Dream
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Byegone Romance
A City of Sadness
A Fantastic Woman
A Few Days from the Life of I. I. Oblomov
A Fine, Windy Day
A Girl in Black
A Heart in Winter
A Hero
A History of Violence
A Man and a Woman
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Muse
A Passage to India (film)
A Prophet
A Queen Is Crowned
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Separation
A Single Spark
A Special Day
A Sunday in the Country
A Taxi Driver
A Touch of Sin
A Very Long Engagement
A World Apart (film)
Abbie Cornish
Abigail Breslin
About Schmidt
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best International Feature Film
Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Original Song
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Awards
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Adada
Adam McKay
Adaptation (film)
Adultery Tree
Aftershock (2010 film)
Aftersun
Ahna O'Reilly
Akira Kurosawa
Alan Arkin
Alan Bates
Albert Finney
Aldis Hodge
Alejandro Amenábar
Alessandro Nivola
Alex Sharp
Alfonso Cuarón
AllMovie
All About Eve
All About My Mother
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)
All That Falls Has Wings
All That Jazz (film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Allison Janney
Almost Famous
Alps (film)
Amadeus (film)
Amarcord
Amazon (company)
Amazon Prime Video
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Fiction (film)
American Film Market
American Hustle
American Sniper
American Splendor (film)
Amores perros
Amour (2012 film)
Amy Adams
Amy Irving
Amy Ryan
Amélie
An American in Paris (film)
An Angel at My Table
An Education
An Officer and a Gentleman
Anatomy of a Fall
Andrea Riseborough
Andy Serkis
Ang Lee
Angela Bassett
Anil Kapoor
Annette Bening
Annie Hall
Another Round (film)
Antarctic Journal
Anthony Andrews
Antoine and Antoinette
Antonia's Line
Antony Sher
Any Number Can Win (film)
Apocalypse Now
Apollo 13 (film)
Aquarius (film)
Arabian Nights (2015 film)
Architectural Digest
Archive.today
Argentina, 1985
Argo (2012 film)
Army of Shadows
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Art therapy
Asghar Farhadi
Ashutosh Lobo Gajiwala
Asia Pacific Screen Award for Best Feature Film
Asian Film Award for Best Film
Assassination (2015 film)
Associated Press
Atlantic City (1980 film)
Au revoir les enfants
August Diehl
Autumn Sonata
Avatar: The Way of Water
Avatar (2009 film)
Ayush Mahesh Khedekar
Azharuddin Mohammed Ismail
BAFTA Award for Best Direction
BAFTA Award for Best Film
BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language
BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay
BIFA Award for Best Foreign Independent Film
BPM (Beats per Minute)
Baahubali 2: The Conclusion
Babe (film)
Babel (film)
Babette's Feast
Back to the Future
Bacurau
Bad Education (2004 film)
Baeksang Arts Award for Best Film
Bagdad Cafe
Barking Dogs Never Bite
Barton Fink
Before, Now & Then
Before Sundown
Before the Rain (1994 film)
Begin the Beguine (film)
Being John Malkovich
Belfast (film)
Belle Époque (film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Ben Affleck
Benicio del Toro
Benjamin Bratt
Bernard Hill
Bertrand Blier
Beyond the Hill
Bicycle Thieves
Big Bad Wolves
Bill Paxton
Bille August
Billy Boyd (actor)
Billy Crudup
Billy Elliot
Birdman (film)
Biutiful
Black Orpheus
Black Panther (film)
Black Republic
Black and White in Color
Black and white
Black comedy
Blind Massage
Blood Rain (film)
Bloodline (1963 film)
Bloody Disgusting
Blowup
Blu-ray
Blue Dragon Film Award for Best Film
Blue Is the Warmest Colour
Blue Velvet (film)
Blue is the Warmest Colour
Bob Balaban
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Bong Joon-ho
Bong Joon-ho filmography
Boogie Nights
Bootstrapping
Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Bowling for Columbine
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Brad Pitt
Bradley Cooper
Brassed Off
Braveheart
Brazil (1985 film)
Bread and Chocolate
Breaking Away
Breaking the Waves
Breathless (2008 film)
Brendan Fraser
Brian d'Arcy James
Bridge of Spies (film)
Brief Encounter
British Film Institute
Brokeback Mountain
Broken Embraces
Bronson (film)
Bruce Jones (actor)
Bryan Cranston
Bryce Dallas Howard
Bugsy
Buil Film Awards
Burning (2018 film)
Burnt by the Sun
CJ Entertainment
CNN
CODA (2021 film)
Caché (film)
Caleb Landry Jones
Call Me by Your Name (film)
Camera coverage
Cannes Film Festival
Capitalism
Capote (film)
Carlos (miniseries)
Carmen (1983 film)
Carnival in Flanders (film)
Carol (film)
Caroline Link
Casablanca (film)
Cate Blanchett
Catherine Zeta-Jones
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Cemetery of Splendour
Central Station (film)
Certified Copy (film)
Chadwick Boseman
Chapagetti
Character (film)
Chariots of Fire
Charles Dance
Che Guevara
Chi-hwa-seon
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Children, Mother, and the General
Children of Men
Children of the Firing Range
Cho Yeo-jeong
Choi Woo-shik
Chris Cooper
Chris Lowell
Chris Messina
Christ Stopped at Eboli (film)
Christian Bale
Christine Baranski
Christine and Léa Papin
Christmas in August
Christoph Waltz
Christopher Denham
Chronicle of the Years of Fire
Chunhyang (2000 film)
Cicely Tyson
Cimarron (1931 film)
Cinema Paradiso
City of God (2002 film)
Claire's Knee
Clarke Peters
Class conflict
Claude Lelouch
Clea DuVall
Clifton Collins Jr.
Clive Owen
Close (2022 film)
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Closely Watched Trains
Cold War (2018 film)
Cold of Kalandar
Colin Firth
Collider (website)
Colm Feore
Colonel Redl
Colonialism
Come Come Come Upward
Come Unto Down
Coming Back (film)
Coming Home (1978 film)
Concentration Of Attention
Concrete Utopia
Confessions of Felix Krull (film)
Conversation Piece (film)
Costa-Gavras
Coup de grace
Crash (2004 film)
Cries and Whispers
Crimes and Misdemeanors
Criterion Collection
Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Crossfire (film)
Crossing (2008 film)
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon
Curzon Cinemas
Curzon Film
Cyrano (film)
Cyrano de Bergerac (1990 film)
César Award for Best Foreign Film
D. W. Moffett
DVD
Da 5 Bloods
Dallas–Fort Worth Film Critics Association
Dan Futterman
Danai Gurira
Dancer in the Dark
Dances with Wolves
Dangerous Liaisons
Dangerous Moves
Daniel Brühl
Daniel Durant
Daniel Kaluuya
Danis Tanović
Danton (1983 film)
Darcy Paquet
David Wenham
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Film
Day for Night (film)
Dead Poets Society
Deadline Hollywood
Deaf Sam-yong (1964 film)
Death Song (film)
Decision to Leave
Deep Blue Night
Deidre Goodwin
Dekalog
Denis Ménochet
Denise Faye
Dennis Quaid
Denys Arcand
Departures (2008 film)
Derek Jacobi
Dersu Uzala (1975 film)
Descendants of Cain (film)
Detroit Film Critics Society Award for Best Film
Dev Patel
Devils on the Doorstep
Dheepan
Diane Kruger
Dianne Wiest
Diary of King Yeonsan (film)
Diary of Korean-Japanese War
Die Brücke (film)
Die Hard
Dinner for Adele
Director of photography
Distant Voices, Still Lives
District 9
Divorce Italian Style
Django Unchained
Do the Right Thing
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dog Day Afternoon
Doi (identifier)
Dominic Monaghan
Dominic West
Don Cheadle
Downfall (2004 film)
Drive My Car (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
Drug War (film)
Drugstore Cowboy
Dumbo
Dunkirk (2017 film)
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
EO (film)
East Asian Monsoon
Eastern Promises
Eat Drink Man Woman
Economic inequality
Economic inequality in South Korea
Ed Harris
Eddie Redmayne
Edward Berger
Edward Norton
Eighth Grade (film)
Eileen Atkins
Ekaterina Shchelkanova
Elephant (2003 film)
Eli Roth
Elijah Wood
Elio Petri
Elisabeth Röhm
Elle (film)
Elmar Klos
Elvira Madigan (1967 film)
Emilia Jones
Emily Watson
Emily Woof
Emma Stone
Entertainment Weekly
Eoudong (film)
Erika Christensen
Escape from Mogadishu
Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind
Eternity and a Day
Eugenio Derbez
Eunuch (film)
Europa Europa
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Face to Face (1976 film)
Facebook
Fahrenheit 9/11
Fallen Leaves (film)
Family Ties (2006 film)
Fandango Media
Fandom, Inc.
Fanny and Alexander
Far from Heaven
Farewell My Concubine (film)
Farewell My Darling
Fargo (1996 film)
Farinelli (film)
Federico Fellini
Ferdia Walsh-Peelo
Fernando Trueba
Festen
Festival (1996 film)
Field of Dreams
Film at Lincoln Center
Film score
Film treatment
Final Cut Pro
Flags of Our Fathers (film)
Flame (1975 film)
Flame in the Valley
Flee (film)
Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck
Fly High Run Far
Fons Rademakers
For Sama
Forbes
Forbidden Games
Force Majeure (film)
Foreign language film
Forest Whitaker
Forever the Moment
Forrest Gump
Four Weddings and a Funeral
Foxtrot (2017 film)
Frances McDormand
Frank Langella
François Truffaut
Freida Pinto
Friendly Persuasion (1956 film)
From Here to Eternity
Frozen (2013 film)
Frozen Spring
GQ
GQ (Indian edition)
Gabriel Axel
Gabriele Salvatores
Gandhi (film)
Garret Dillahunt
Gary Sinise
Gate of Hell (film)
Gate of Woman
Gavin Hood
Gene Hackman
Genevieve (film)
Genie Music
Gentleman's Agreement
Geoffrey Rush
George Frideric Handel
Geraldine Somerville
Gervaise (film)
Get Out
Get Out Your Handkerchiefs
Gianni Morandi
Gigi (1958 film)
Gilsoddeum
Girl and the River
Giuseppe Tornatore
Gladiator (2000 film)
Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery
Glen Powell
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay
Gone with the Wind (film)
Goodbye to Language
Goodfellas
Gosford Park
Goyang City
Gran Torino
Grand Bell Awards
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Gravity (2013 film)
Green Book (film)
Green Fish
Greg Kinnear
Guess Who's Coming to Dinner
Guldbagge Award for Best Foreign Film
Guy Pearce
Gwyneth Paltrow
HBO
Habitus (sociology)
Haemoo
Hamlet (1948 film)
HanCinema
Han Jin-won
Hangul
Hanja
Hank Azaria
Hankook Ilbo
Hannah and Her Sisters
Happiness (1998 film)
Harry Shum Jr.
Harvard University
Harvest (1937 film)
Headhunters (film)
Heartbeats (2010 film)
Helen Mirren
Helena Bonham Carter
Hell Joseon
Henequen (film)
Henry V (1989 film)
Her (film)
Hereafter (film)
Hero (2002 film)
Hidden Figures
High Heels (1991 film)
Higher education
Hiroshi Inagaki
Hiroshima mon amour
Hollywood Reporter
Holy Motors
Home video
Hong Kyung-pyo
Hoop Dreams
Hope (2013 film)
Hope and Glory (film)
House of Flying Daggers
House of Games
House of Hummingbird
Houston Film Critics Society Award for Best Picture
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Hugo (film)
Hugo Speer
Hugo Weaving
Hulu
Hunger (2008 film)
Husbands and Wives
Hyperallergic
I've Loved You So Long
I, Daniel Blake
IGN
IMAX
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
I Am Love (film)
I Am Not Madame Bovary
Ian Holm
Ian McKellen
Ida (film)
If....
Il Postino: The Postman
Il divo (film)
Imelda Staunton
Imperialism
In This World
In a Better World
In ginocchio da te
In the Bedroom
In the Fade
In the Heat of the Night (film)
In the Mood for Love
In the Name of the Father (film)
Incandescent light bulb
Incendies
Independent Spirit Award for Best International Film
IndieWire
Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Indochine (film)
Inglourious Basterds
Ingmar Bergman
Ingyeo ingan
Inside Llewyn Davis
Inside Men (film)
International Film Festival Rotterdam
Intertitle
Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion
Invited People
Irrfan Khan
Irréversible
István Szabó
It Happened One Night
JFK (film)
JTBC
Jack Huston
Jacky Ido
Jacob Vargas
Jacques Tati
James Brolin
James Hong
James Wilby
Jamie Lee Curtis
Jan Svěrák
Janelle Monáe
Jang Hye-jin (actress)
Japan Academy Film Prize
Japan Academy Film Prize for Outstanding Foreign Language Film
Javier Bardem
Jean-Jacques Annaud
Jean de Florette
Jennifer Ehle
Jennifer Esposito
Jennifer Lawrence
Jenny Slate
Jeonju
Jeremy Northam
Jeremy Renner
Jeremy Strong
Jessica Chastain
Jesus Christ Superstar (film)
Jim Carter (actor)
Jim Parsons
Jiří Menzel
Jjapaguri
John C. Reilly
John Carroll Lynch
John Goodman
John Hawkes (actor)
John Noble
John Rhys-Davies
John Slattery
Joint Security Area (film)
Joker (2019 film)
Joseph Fiennes
Joseph Gordon-Levitt
Josh Brolin
José Luis Garci
Journey of Hope
Joyland (film)
Juan José Campanella
Judgment at Nuremberg
Judi Dench
Julie Dreyfus
Juliet of the Spirits
Jung Hyeon-jun
Jung Jae-il
Jung Ji-so
Jung Yi-seo
Jurassic Park (film)
Justice Is Done
Justice Party (South Korea)
Justin Chang
Juvenile Offender
Ján Kadár
Kadosh
Kagemusha
KakaoTalk
Karl Marx
Karl Urban
Kathleen Quinlan
Ke Huy Quan
Kelly Macdonald
Kelvin Harrison Jr.
Kerry Bishé
Kevin Bacon
Kevin Costner
Kevin Spacey
Killers of the Flower Moon (film)
King and the Clown
Kirsten Dunst
Kiss of the Spider Woman (film)
Kolya (film)
Korea.net
Korea JoongAng Daily
Korean Film Council
Korean Movie Database
Korean language
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kristin Scott Thomas
Kung Fu Hustle
Kwak Sin-ae
Kyle Chandler
L'Amore (film)
L'Enfant (film)
L.A. Confidential (film)
La Cage aux Folles (film)
La Dame aux Camélias
La Dolce Vita
La Grande Illusion
La La Land
La La Land (film)
La Llorona (2019 film)
La Strada
La Vérité (film)
Lady Bird (film)
Lady Vengeance
Land and Freedom (film)
Lantana (film)
Larenz Tate
Late-stage capitalism
Late Autumn (1966 film)
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Le quattro volte
Leaving Las Vegas
Lee Jung-eun (actress)
Lee Sun-kyun
Les Misérables (1995 film)
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Lesley Sharp
Let the Right One In (film)
Letitia Wright
Letters from Iwo Jima
Leviathan (2014 film)
Libera Me (2000 film)
Lies My Father Told Me
Liev Schreiber
Life Is Beautiful
Life Is Sweet (film)
Life and Death of the Hollywood Kid
Life and Nothing But
List of Academy Award records
List of South Korean submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film
List of accolades received by Parasite
List of awards and nominations received by Bong Joon-ho
List of films considered the best
List of submissions to the 92nd Academy Awards for Best International Feature Film
Literal translation
Little Dorrit (1987 film)
Little Miss Sunshine
Liv Tyler
Live for Life
London Film Critics' Circle Award for Film of the Year
London Review of Books
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Los Angeles Times
Lost in Translation (film)
Louis C.K.
Lourdes (2009 film)
Loveless (film)
Lucas Hedges
Lucy Liu
Ludacris
Luis Buñuel
Luis Guzmán
Luis Puenzo
Lupita Nyong'o
Lust, Caution
László Nemes
M*A*S*H (film)
Ma vie en rose
Mad Max: Fury Road
Mad Max 2
Madame Rosa
Madhur Mittal
Madman Entertainment
Maeil Business Newspaper
Maggie Smith
Magnolia (film)
Mahershala Ali
Mainichi Film Award for Foreign Film Best One Award
Malcolm X (1992 film)
Man-suk, Run!
Man of Aran
Man of Iron
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Manon des Sources (1986 film)
Marathon (2005 film)
Marathon Man (film)
Marcel Camus
Maria Full of Grace
Mark Addy
Mark Ruffalo
Mark Rylance
Market (1965 film)
Marlee Matlin
Marleen Gorris
Marriage Italian Style
Martin Clunes
Martin Freeman
Martin Scorsese
Martin Wuttke
Marty (film)
Mary Steenburgen
María Candelaria
Masquerade (2012 film)
Mass (2021 film)
Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World
Matt Dillon
Maurice Cloche
Mayerling (1936 film)
Mayumi (film)
McCune–Reischauer
Mediterraneo
Melancholia (2011 film)
Melvin and Howard
Memento (film)
Memories of Murder
Men Without Wings
Mena Suvari
Mephisto (1981 film)
Metacritic
Miasma theory
Michael B. Jordan
Michael Douglas
Michael Fassbender
Michael Gambon
Michael Haneke
Michael Keaton
Michael Peña
Michelle Yeoh
Mickey 17
Midnight Cowboy
Miguel Ferrer
Mike Myers
Mike Vogel
Mike van Diem
Milan Records
Milk (2008 American film)
Million Dollar Baby
Mina Tannenbaum
Minari (film)
Miracle in Milan
Miranda Otto
Miss Julie (1951 film)
Missing (1982 film)
Mississippi Burning
Mommy (2014 film)
Mon Oncle
Mongol (film)
Monsieur Hire
Monsieur Vincent
Monsoon Wedding
Monster's Ball
Monsters (2010 film)
Moonlight (2016 film)
Moonlight Hunter
Moscow Does Not Believe in Tears
Moshé Mizrahi
Mother (1976 film)
Mother (1985 film)
Mother (2009 film)
Motion Picture Association of America
Moulin Rouge!
Mountains May Depart
Mrs. Miniver
Mulholland Drive (film)
Mulleya Mulleya
Munich (2005 film)
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My American Uncle
My Fair Lady (film)
My Favorite Season
My Left Foot
My Life as a Dog
Mya (singer)
Mysteries of Lisbon
Mystery (2012 film)
Mystic River (film)
Mélanie Laurent
NPR
Naomi Watts
Nashville (film)
Nathan Lane
National Board of Review Award for Best Foreign Language Film
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Film
Naver
Neecha Nagar
Nelly and Mr. Arnaud
Neoguri (instant noodle)
Neon (distributor)
Net revenue
Network (1976 film)
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Night and Day (2008 film)
Nights of Cabiria
Nikita Mikhalkov
No Country for Old Men
No Man's Land (2001 film)
No Time to Die
No Way Back (1953 film)
Nocturnal Animals
Nomadland
Nongshim
Nowhere in Africa
Nowhere to Hide (1999 film)
O Pagador de Promessas
Oasis (2002 film)
Octavia Spencer
Odd Obsession
Ode to My Father
Of Gods and Men (film)
Okja
Oldboy (2003 film)
Oliver! (film)
Omar (film)
On Body and Soul
On the Waterfront
Once (film)
Once Upon a Time in America
One Fine Spring Day
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Picture
Only God Forgives
Ordet
Ordinary People
Orlando Bloom
Osama (film)
Otello (1986 film)
Othello (1951 film)
Our Twisted Hero (film)
Out of Africa (film)
Out of Sight
Oxford University
Oyster Village
Padre Padrone
Paisan
Palme d'Or
Pan's Labyrinth
Paolo Sorrentino
Paradise Now
Parallel Mothers
Parasite (soundtrack)
Paris, Texas (film)
Park Myung-hoon
Park Seo-joon
Park So-dam
Passion Portrait
Pastoral Symphony (film)
Pather Panchali
Patriotic Martyr An Jung-gun
Patton (film)
Paul Barber (actor)
Paul Dano
Paul Giamatti
Paul Herman
Paweł Pawlikowski
Pedro Almodóvar
Pelle the Conqueror
Peppermint Candy
Persona (1966 film)
Peter Dinklage
Peter Gallagher
Peter Riegert
Phoenix (2014 film)
Photoshop
Pierre Bourdieu
Pietà (film)
Pillar of Mist
Pixote
Platoon (film)
Poetry (film)
Police Story (1979 film)
Polygon (magazine)
Ponette
Port of Shadows
Postmen in the Mountains
Prince Daewon
Prince Yeonsan (film)
Prisoner of the Mountains
Promising Young Woman
Pulp Fiction
Pépé le Moko
Queen Latifah
Quest for Fire (film)
Quo Vadis, Aida?
RRR (film)
Rachel McAdams
Raging Bull
Rain Man
Raise the Red Lantern
Ramen
Ramyeon
Ran (film)
Rashomon
Raw (film)
Rebecca (1940 film)
René Clément
Renée Zellweger
Review aggregator
Revised Romanization of Korean
Revivre
Rice (1963 film)
Richard Dembo
Richard E. Grant
Richard Gere
Rider on the Rain
Ridicule (film)
Riding Alone for Thousands of Miles
Road to Perdition
Robert Carlyle
Roberto Benigni
Robin Williams
Rocky
Rod Taylor
Rodelinda (opera)
Roma (2018 film)
Rome, Open City
Romeo and Juliet (1954 film)
Room (2015 film)
Rory Cochrane
Rosemary (film)
Rosetta (film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Routledge
Rubina Ali
Run Lola Run
Ryan's Daughter
Ryan Phillippe
Ryusuke Hamaguchi
Régis Wargnier
S2CID (identifier)
SKATS
Sacha Baron Cohen
Sacred Bones Records
Sad Story of Self Supporting Child
Saint Omer (film)
Sam Rockwell
Samara Weaving
Samjin Company English Class
Samson and Delilah (2009 film)
Samurai I: Musashi Miyamoto
San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Foreign Language Film
San Francisco Bay Area Film Critics Circle Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Sandra Bullock
Sandra Oh
Saturn Award for Best International Film
Saving Private Ryan
Scanners
Scarecrow (1973 film)
Scenes from a Marriage
Scent of a Woman (1974 film)
Schindler's List
Scoot McNairy
Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture
Screen International
Sea Fog
Sean Astin
Sean Bean
Seattle Film Critics Society
Seattle Film Critics Society Award for Best Ensemble Cast
Sebastián Lelio
Secret Reunion
Secret Sunshine
Secrets & Lies (film)
Seopyeonje
Seoul
Seoul National University
Seoul Rainbow
Seoul Tourism Organization
Serge Bourguignon
Sergei Bondarchuk
Sex, Lies, and Videotape
Shakespeare in Love
Shall We Dance? (1996 film)
Shame (1968 film)
Shanghai Triad
Shea Whigham
Shiri (film)
Shoeshine (film)
Shoplifters (film)
Short Cuts
Sic
Sideways
Silmido (film)
Silver Linings Playbook
Silver Stallion (1991 film)
Simon Callow
Sin nombre (film)
Sissy Spacek
Slate (magazine)
Slumdog Millionaire
Small Axe (anthology)
Smugglers (2023 film)
Snowpiercer
Social inequality
Soju
Son of Man (1980 film)
Son of Saul
Song Kang-ho
Sophie's Choice (film)
Sophie Thompson
South Korea
Space Cowboys
Special Investigation Unit: The Case of Bae Tae-ok
Splendid Outing
Spotify
Spotlight (film)
Spring, Spring
Spring, Summer, Fall, Winter... and Spring
Spring in My Hometown
Stairway To Heaven (1992 film)
Stanley Tucci
Star Wars (film)
Stefan Ruzowitzky
Stella (1955 film)
Stephanie Hsu
Stephen Fry
Sterling K. Brown
Steve Carell
Steve Huison
Steven Bauer
Still Life (2006 film)
Stone Music Entertainment
Story of Women
Stranger Than Paradise
Streaming services
Sully (film)
Summer Hours
Sundays and Cybele
Sundays and Cybèle
Surplus-value
Surplus labor
Susan Misner
Susanne Bier
Suseok
Sweet Country (2017 film)
Sweetie (1989 film)
Sydney Film Festival
Sylvester Groth
Taegukgi (film)
Take Off (2009 film)
Talk to Her
Tanay Chheda
Tango (1998 film)
Tanvi Ganesh Lonkar
Taraji P. Henson
Taste of Cherry
Tate Donovan
Taxi (2015 film)
Taxi Driver
Taye Diggs
Teinosuke Kinugasa
Tell No One
Terms of Endearment
Terrence Howard
Tess (1979 film)
Tess Harper
Thandiwe Newton
That Man from Rio
That Obscure Object of Desire
The 400 Blows
The A.V. Club
The Act of Killing
The Admiral: Roaring Currents
The Age of Shadows
The Agony and the Ecstasy (film)
The Apartment
The Apartment (1996 film)
The Artist (film)
The Assassin (2015 film)
The Assault (1986 film)
The Atlantic
The Attorney
The Baker's Wife (film)
The Ballad of Narayama (1983 film)
The Banshees of Inisherin
The Barbarian Invasions
The Beasts (2022 film)
The Beat That My Heart Skipped
The Best Intentions
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Birdcage
The Birds, the Bees and the Italians
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Broken Circle Breakdown
The Chaser (2008 film)
The Class (2008 film)
The Color of Paradise
The Contact (1997 South Korean film)
The Conversation
The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover
The Counterfeiters (2007 film)
The Cranes Are Flying
The Criterion Collection
The Crying Game
The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (film)
The Damned (1947 film)
The Dark Knight
The Dead (1987 film)
The Decline of the American Empire
The Deer Hunter
The Departed
The Descendants
The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie
The Divine Weapon
The Diving Bell and the Butterfly (film)
The Dong-a Ilbo
The Double Life of Veronique
The Dresser (1983 film)
The Edge of Heaven (film)
The Eel (film)
The Elephant Man (film)
The Emigrants (film)
The English Patient (film)
The Eternal Empire
The Eternal Mask
The Executioner (1975 film)
The Fabelmans
The Face Reader
The Father (2020 film)
The Favourite
The Florida Project
The Fortress (2017 film)
The French Connection (film)
The Front Line (2011 film)
The Full Monty
The Garden of the Finzi-Continis (film)
The General's Mustache
The General in Red Robes
The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo (2009 film)
The Go-Between (1971 film)
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Grandmaster (film)
The Great Beauty
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guardian
The Handmaiden
The Hankyoreh
The Heiresses (2018 film)
The Help (film)
The Hidden Hero
The Hireling
The Hollywood Reporter
The Host (2006 film)
The Hours (film)
The Houseguest and My Mother
The Housemaid (1960 film)
The Hunt (2012 film)
The Hurt Locker
The Ice Storm (film)
The Insider (film)
The Intouchables
The Kid with a Bike
The King's Speech
The King and the Clown
The King of Comedy (film)
The Knack ...and How to Get It
The Korea Herald
The Land (1974 film)
The Last Chance (1945 film)
The Last Emperor
The Last Samurai
The Last Words from a Comrade in Arms
The Leopard (1963 film)
The Life Ahead
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Lives of Others
The Long Absence
The Longest Day (film)
The Look of Silence
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Lovers of Woomook-baemi
The Man Standing Next
The Man Who Wasn't There (2001 film)
The Man Without a Past
The Man from Nowhere (2010 film)
The Marquise of O (film)
The Master (2012 film)
The Mattei Affair
The Memorial Gate for Virtuous Women
The Mission (1986 film)
The Motorcycle Diaries (film)
The Name of the Rose (film)
The Nasty Girl
The Nation
The New Land
The New York Times
The Night Owl (2022 film)
The Night of the Shooting Stars
The Numbers (website)
The Official Story
The Old Jar Craftsman
The Past (2013 film)
The Pedestrian (film)
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Piano
The Policeman
The Power of the Dog (film)
The President's Last Bang
The Prince and the Showgirl
The Prisoner (1955 film)
The Purple Rose of Cairo
The Queen (2006 film)
The Red Meadows
The Return (2003 film)
The Rider (film)
The Road a Year Long
The Sacrifice (1986 film)
The Salesman (2016 film)
The Sea Inside
The Sea Village
The Secret in Their Eyes
The Shameless
The Shape of Water
The Shawshank Redemption
The Shop on Main Street
The Show Must Go On (2007 film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Silent World
The Sixth Sense
The Skin I Live In
The Sleeping Car Murders
The Social Network
The Son's Room
The Son (2002 film)
The Sorrow and the Pity
The Sound Barrier
The Sound of Music (film)
The Spy (1999 film)
The Spy Gone North
The Square (2017 film)
The Sting
The Story of Adele H.
The Story of Two Women
The Straight Story
The Sweet Hereafter (film)
The Sydney Morning Herald
The Taebaek Mountains
The Taste of Others
The Theory of Everything (2014 film)
The Third Man
The Three-Day Reign
The Throne (film)
The Tin Drum
The Tin Drum (film)
The Titan: Story of Michelangelo
The Towering Inferno
The Tragedy of Deaf Sam-yong
The Tree of Life (film)
The Tree of Wooden Clogs
The Trial of the Chicago 7
The Trip to Bountiful
The Triplets of Belleville
The Turning Point (1945 film)
The Umbrellas of Cherbourg
The Unbearable Lightness of Being (film)
The Unjust
The Virgin Spring
The Wages of Fear
The Wailing (2016 film)
The Wall Street Journal
The Walls of Malapaga
The War Is Over (1966 film)
The Washington Post
The Way Home (2002 film)
The White Balloon
The White Reindeer
The White Ribbon
The Wild Child
The Wind That Shakes the Barley (film)
The Wishing Tree (1976 film)
The Working Class Goes to Heaven
The World (film)
The World of Apu
The Worst Person in the World (film)
The Wrestler (2008 film)
The Zone of Interest (film)
Thelma & Louise
Thelma (2017 film)
There Is No Evil
There Will Be Blood
Thierry Frémaux
This Is England
Thomas Haden Church
Thomas Vinterberg
Thora Birch
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Three Colours: Red
Thriller film
Through a Glass Darkly (film)
Til Schweiger
Tilda Swinton
Timbuktu (2014 film)
Time Out (magazine)
Time Stands Still (film)
Time of the Gypsies
Timothy Spall
Titane
Titanic (1997 film)
Tizoc (film)
To Live (1994 film)
To Live in Peace
Tokyo!
Tokyo Sonata
Tom Hanks
Tom Hollander
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tom Wilkinson
Tomas Milian
Tommy Lee Jones
Toni Collette
Toni Erdmann
Tootsie
Top Gun: Maverick
Topher Grace
Topsy-Turvy
Torment (1944 film)
Toronto Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Toronto Film Critics Association Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Toronto International Film Festival
Toto the Hero
Traffic (2000 film)
Train of Life
Triangle of Sadness
Troy Kotsur
Tsotsi
Tuberculosis
Tulpan
Turbo Kid
Twenty-Four Eyes
Two Cents Worth of Hope
Two Cops
Two Days, One Night
Two Women
Tár
Udon
Ultra HD Blu-ray
Ulysses' Gaze
Umberto D.
Unbowed
Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives
Under the Sun of Satan (film)
Underground (1995 film)
Unforgiven
Union Pacific (film)
United 93 (film)
United States Forces Korea
Universal Pictures Home Entertainment
Up (2009 film)
Up in the Air (2009 film)
VFX
Vancouver Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
Vancouver Film Critics Circle Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Variety (magazine)
Veteran (2015 film)
Victor/Victoria
Victor Garber
Viggo Mortensen
Village in the Mist
Viola Davis
Virginia Madsen
Viridiana
Vittorio De Sica
Viva! Love
Vladimir Menshov
Voces inocentes
Volker Schlöndorff
Volver
Vulture (website)
WALL-E
Waikiki Brothers
Waltz with Bashir
War and Human Being
War and Peace (1956 film)
War and Peace (film series)
Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Waxwork Records
Wayback Machine
We All Loved Each Other So Much
Weighted arithmetic mean
Welcome to Dongmakgol
Wendy and Lucy
Wes Bentley
West Side Story (1961 film)
Whale Hunting (film)
Whale Rider
WhatsApp
When Father Was Away on Business
When a Woman Breaks Her Jewel Box
Widows (2018 film)
Wife of a Spy
Wild Reeds
Wild Strawberries (film)
Wild Tales (film)
Wild at Heart (film)
William Fichtner
Wings (1927 film)
Wings of Desire
Winston Duke
Winter Sleep (film)
Wir Wunderkinder
Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown
Woody Harrelson
World Without Sun
Writers Guild of America
Xavier Koller
Y Tu Mamá También
Y tu mamá también
Yahya Abdul-Mateen II
Yang Jin-mo
Yellow Crow
Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow
Yi Yi
Yol
Yonhap News Agency
Yonsei University
You, the Living
YouTube
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Youth (2017 film)
Yōjirō Takita
Z (1969 film)
Zach Galifianakis
Zero Dark Thirty
Ziegfeld Follies (film)
Željko Ivanek
https://www.koreanfilm.or.kr/eng/news/news.jsp?pageIndex=2&blbdComCd=601006&seq=4849&mode=VIEW
https://variety.com/2018/film/news/bong-joon-ho-parasite-neon-1203015944/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bong-joon-ho-s-parasite-picked-up-by-neon-at-afm-2018-1156727
https://www.screendaily.com/news/bong-joon-ho-thriller-parasite-sells-to-us-japan-france/5134106.article
https://www.koreanfilm.or.kr/eng/news/news.jsp?pageIndex=1&blbdComCd=601006&seq=5001&mode=VIEW
https://www.festival-cannes.com/en/press/press-articles/communique/articles/the-screenings-guide-2019
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/parasite_2019
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/parasite
https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2019/may/25/cannes-film-festival-2019-palme-dor-winner-announced-live
https://deadline.com/2019/05/parasite-bong-joon-ho-north-korea-jokes-cannes-palme-dor-1202622402/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bong-joon-ho-s-palme-d-winner-parasite-get-awards-release-1214522
https://variety.com/2019/film/news/parasite-bong-joon-ho-first-festival-china-palme-dor-1203282678/
https://www.kofic.or.kr/kofic/business/board/selectBoardDetail.do?boardNumber=4&boardSeqNumber=49491
https://variety.com/2019/film/news/oscars-korea-selects-palme-dor-winner-parasite-international-feature-film-award-1203309121/
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/04/movies/new-york-film-festival.html
https://www.vulture.com/2019/05/bong-joon-hos-parasite-is-a-nerve-racking-masterpiece.html
https://www.timeout.com/us/film/parasite
https://variety.com/2019/film/reviews/parasite-review-1203221435/
https://film.avclub.com/parasite-may-be-bong-joon-ho-s-most-thrilling-ride-on-t-1838933205
https://deadline.com/2019/10/gemini-man-will-smith-joker-addams-family-jexi-weekend-box-office-1202757855/
https://deadline.com/2019/10/maleficent-mistress-of-evil-zombieland-double-tap-weekend-box-office-1202763525/
https://deadline.com/2019/10/synonyms-nadav-lapid-kanye-west-jesus-is-king-frankie-ira-sachs-isabelle-huppert-specialty-box-office-1202769933/
https://www.thewrap.com/parasite-sets-new-record-for-director-bong-joon-ho-at-indie-box-office/
https://www.architecturaldigest.com/story/bong-joon-ho-parasite-movie-set-design-interview
https://www.indiewire.com/2019/10/parasite-house-set-design-bong-joon-ho-1202185829/
https://www.indiewire.com/2019/11/box-office-amazon-honey-boy-netflix-marriage-story-1202188521/
https://www.indiewire.com/2019/11/waves-a24-box-office-arthouse-1202190157/
https://www.indiewire.com/2019/11/box-office-dark-waters-arthouse-openers-1202191841/
https://www.indiewire.com/2019/12/holiday-box-office-harriet-jojo-rabbit-two-popes-1202193331/
https://www.metacritic.com/feature/critics-pick-top-10-best-movies-of-2019
https://variety.com/2019/film/news/2020-golden-globes-nominations-list-nominees-1203426905/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191209155146/https://variety.com/2019/film/news/2020-golden-globes-nominations-list-nominees-1203426905/
https://www.npr.org/2019/12/10/785090210/parasite-director-bong-joon-ho-wanted-to-reflect-the-truth-of-current-times
https://deadline.com/2019/12/uncut-gems-shines-with-biggest-a24-per-screen-opening-a-hidden-life-debuts-lionsgate-drops-limited-bombshell-release-specialty-box-office-1202809673/
https://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2019/12/16/us/ap-us-oscars-international-film-shortlist.html
https://www.gq.com/story/parasite-review
https://www.metacritic.com/browse/movies/score/metascore/all/filtered?sort=desc
https://www.curzoncinemas.com/film-info/parasite-bong-joon-ho
https://www.facebook.com/madmanfilms/photos/a.196868033666540/2479620522057935/?type=3&theater
https://www.facebook.com/madmanfilms/photos/a.196868033666540/2537566332930020/?type=3&theater
https://www.facebook.com/madmanfilms/photos/a.196868033666540/2850457264974257/?type=3&theater
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/adam-mckay-bong-joon-ho-teaming-parasite-limited-series-hbo-1268397
http://www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20200113000836
https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/movies/story/2020-01-13/parasite-oscar-nominations-everything-you-need-to-know
https://web.archive.org/web/20191104063450/https://www.thewrap.com/parasite-sets-new-record-for-director-bong-joon-ho-at-indie-box-office/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190204014147/https://www.koreanfilm.or.kr/eng/news/news.jsp?pageIndex=1&blbdComCd=601006&seq=5001&mode=VIEW
https://web.archive.org/web/20191104232715/https://www.indiewire.com/2019/10/parasite-house-set-design-bong-joon-ho-1202185829/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190509101313/https://www.festival-cannes.com/en/press/press-articles/communique/articles/the-screenings-guide-2019
https://web.archive.org/web/20190203202148/https://variety.com/2018/film/news/bong-joon-ho-parasite-neon-1203015944/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190203202052/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bong-joon-ho-s-parasite-picked-up-by-neon-at-afm-2018-1156727
https://web.archive.org/web/20190203202217/https://www.screendaily.com/news/bong-joon-ho-thriller-parasite-sells-to-us-japan-france/5134106.article
https://web.archive.org/web/20190530200626/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bong-joon-ho-s-palme-d-winner-parasite-get-awards-release-1214522
https://web.archive.org/web/20190730143510/https://variety.com/2019/film/news/parasite-bong-joon-ho-first-festival-china-palme-dor-1203282678/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200101073142/https://www.curzoncinemas.com/film-info/parasite-bong-joon-ho
https://web.archive.org/web/20191011150127/https://deadline.com/2019/10/gemini-man-will-smith-joker-addams-family-jexi-weekend-box-office-1202757855/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191019220728/https://deadline.com/2019/10/maleficent-mistress-of-evil-zombieland-double-tap-weekend-box-office-1202763525/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191027175507/https://deadline.com/2019/10/synonyms-nadav-lapid-kanye-west-jesus-is-king-frankie-ira-sachs-isabelle-huppert-specialty-box-office-1202769933/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191110194039/https://www.indiewire.com/2019/11/box-office-amazon-honey-boy-netflix-marriage-story-1202188521/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191117190609/https://www.indiewire.com/2019/11/waves-a24-box-office-arthouse-1202190157/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191125113120/https://www.indiewire.com/2019/11/box-office-dark-waters-arthouse-openers-1202191841/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191201182642/https://www.indiewire.com/2019/12/holiday-box-office-harriet-jojo-rabbit-two-popes-1202193331/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191215173332/https://deadline.com/2019/12/uncut-gems-shines-with-biggest-a24-per-screen-opening-a-hidden-life-debuts-lionsgate-drops-limited-bombshell-release-specialty-box-office-1202809673/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191211232005/https://rottentomatoes.com/m/parasite_2019
https://web.archive.org/web/20191018183825/https://www.metacritic.com/movie/parasite
https://web.archive.org/web/20191007030522/https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/04/movies/new-york-film-festival.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20191007104809/https://www.vulture.com/2019/05/bong-joon-hos-parasite-is-a-nerve-racking-masterpiece.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20191007190446/https://www.timeout.com/us/film/parasite
https://web.archive.org/web/20190713080323/https://variety.com/2019/film/reviews/parasite-review-1203221435/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191011084422/https://film.avclub.com/parasite-may-be-bong-joon-ho-s-most-thrilling-ride-on-t-1838933205
https://web.archive.org/web/20191218064844/https://www.gq.com/story/parasite-review
https://web.archive.org/web/20200112201058/https://www.metacritic.com/feature/critics-pick-top-10-best-movies-of-2019
https://web.archive.org/web/20190809210855/https://www.metacritic.com/browse/movies/score/metascore/all/filtered?sort=desc
https://web.archive.org/web/20190526093153/https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2019/may/25/cannes-film-festival-2019-palme-dor-winner-announced-live
https://web.archive.org/web/20190526020408/https://deadline.com/2019/05/parasite-bong-joon-ho-north-korea-jokes-cannes-palme-dor-1202622402/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191212221503/https://www.npr.org/2019/12/10/785090210/parasite-director-bong-joon-ho-wanted-to-reflect-the-truth-of-current-times
https://web.archive.org/web/20190821173038/https://variety.com/2019/film/news/oscars-korea-selects-palme-dor-winner-parasite-international-feature-film-award-1203309121/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191217134423/https://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2019/12/16/us/ap-us-oscars-international-film-shortlist.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200115032343/http://www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20200113000836
https://web.archive.org/web/20200115033844/https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/movies/story/2020-01-13/parasite-oscar-nominations-everything-you-need-to-know
https://web.archive.org/web/20200110022107/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/adam-mckay-bong-joon-ho-teaming-parasite-limited-series-hbo-1268397
https://nofilmschool.com/parasite-editor-interview
https://www.screendaily.com/features/bong-joon-ho-talks-parasite-it-deals-with-polarisation/5139556.article
https://www.latimes.com/food/story/2019-10-19/parasite-ramdon-bong-joon-ho-ramen-udon-jjapaguri
https://www.indiewire.com/2020/01/parasite-tv-series-bong-joon-ho-six-hour-movie-1202205540/
https://www.ign.com/articles/parasite-bong-joon-ho-reveals-the-meaning-behind-the-title-of-the-oscar-nominated-film
https://www.vulture.com/2020/01/parasite-ending-explained-by-bong-joon-ho.html
https://www.npr.org/2019/11/05/776388423/the-hit-movie-parasite-puts-basement-structures-in-structural-inequality
https://ew.com/movies/2019/10/15/parasite-2019-cinematic-class-conflict/
https://www.forbes.com/sites/travisbean/2020/01/30/capitalism-gone-wild-the-ending-of-parasite-explained/#2a97c8df6dbd
https://www.gq.com/story/parasite-director-bong-joon-ho-interview
https://www.indiewire.com/2020/02/bafta-winners-2020-1202208012/
https://entertain.naver.com/read?oid=001&aid=0011373001
http://news.kbs.co.kr/news/view.do?ncd=4376313
https://www.cinemaescapist.com/2019/10/parasite-korean-movie-review/
https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-for-south-korean-youth-parasite-burrows-close-to-home/
https://news.wbfo.org/post/oscar-nominated-parasite-speaks-growing-divide-south-korea
https://www.polygon.com/2019/10/14/20906430/parasite-bong-joon-ho-interview-rock-peach-spoilers
http://m.korea.net/english/NewsFocus/People/view?articleId=171974&page=1
https://www.metacritic.com/feature/best-movies-released-in-2019
https://slate.com/culture/2020/02/in-the-absence-documentary-korean-oscar-nominee-interview-sewol.html
https://deadline.com/2020/02/birds-of-prey-weekend-box-office-margot-robbie-1202853768/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200115024246/https://www.vulture.com/2020/01/parasite-ending-explained-by-bong-joon-ho.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20191226230904/https://www.polygon.com/2019/10/14/20906430/parasite-bong-joon-ho-interview-rock-peach-spoilers
https://web.archive.org/web/20200115132532/https://www.latimes.com/food/story/2019-10-19/parasite-ramdon-bong-joon-ho-ramen-udon-jjapaguri
https://web.archive.org/web/20200208155256/http://m.korea.net/english/NewsFocus/People/view?articleId=171974&page=1
https://web.archive.org/web/20200131150546/https://www.ign.com/articles/parasite-bong-joon-ho-reveals-the-meaning-behind-the-title-of-the-oscar-nominated-film
https://web.archive.org/web/20190727005536/https://www.screendaily.com/features/bong-joon-ho-talks-parasite-it-deals-with-polarisation/5139556.article
https://web.archive.org/web/20200118035230/https://nofilmschool.com/parasite-editor-interview
https://web.archive.org/web/20200116002438/https://www.npr.org/2019/11/05/776388423/the-hit-movie-parasite-puts-basement-structures-in-structural-inequality
https://web.archive.org/web/20200203170810/https://ew.com/movies/2019/10/15/parasite-2019-cinematic-class-conflict/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200131150417/https://www.forbes.com/sites/travisbean/2020/01/30/capitalism-gone-wild-the-ending-of-parasite-explained/#2a97c8df6dbd
https://web.archive.org/web/20191219211642/https://www.gq.com/story/parasite-director-bong-joon-ho-interview
https://web.archive.org/web/20200111215042/https://www.cinemaescapist.com/2019/10/parasite-korean-movie-review/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200110024738/https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-for-south-korean-youth-parasite-burrows-close-to-home/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200207131837/https://news.wbfo.org/post/oscar-nominated-parasite-speaks-growing-divide-south-korea
https://web.archive.org/web/20200107173908/https://www.washingtonpost.com/arts-entertainment/2019/10/24/unpacking-metaphorical-ending-parasite/?outputType=amp
https://web.archive.org/web/20200208173530/https://deadline.com/2020/02/birds-of-prey-weekend-box-office-margot-robbie-1202853768/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200108120521/https://www.metacritic.com/feature/best-movies-released-in-2019
https://web.archive.org/web/20200206005230/https://slate.com/culture/2020/02/in-the-absence-documentary-korean-oscar-nominee-interview-sewol.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200202193402/https://www.indiewire.com/2020/02/bafta-winners-2020-1202208012/
https://www.metacritic.com/feature/best-movies-of-the-decade-2010s
https://web.archive.org/web/20200101162640/https://www.metacritic.com/feature/best-movies-of-the-decade-2010s
https://cdn-media.festival-cannes.com/film_film/0001/66/72f026493fedd9576b0ebc4b7837fd67b8cc95a3.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20200124175554/https://www.indiewire.com/2020/01/parasite-tv-series-bong-joon-ho-six-hour-movie-1202205540/
https://deadline.com/2020/02/parasite-record-breaking-uk-box-office-debut-1202856229/
https://fromtheintercom.com/interview-director-bong-joon-ho/
https://ew.com/movies/2019/10/23/parasite-bong-joon-ho-ending-explained/
https://www.gq.com/story/bong-joon-ho-breaks-down-parasites-wild-ending
https://web.archive.org/web/20200110043736/https://cdn-media.festival-cannes.com/film_film/0001/66/72f026493fedd9576b0ebc4b7837fd67b8cc95a3.pdf
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/making-parasite-how-bong-joon-hos-real-life-inspired-a-plot-twisty-tale-rich-poor-1252015
https://web.archive.org/web/20200113115829/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/making-parasite-how-bong-joon-hos-real-life-inspired-a-plot-twisty-tale-rich-poor-1252015
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/parasite-join-criterion-collection-1279250
https://bloody-disgusting.com/home-video/3604763/bong-joon-hos-parasite-memories-murder-joining-criterion-collection/
https://deadline.com/2020/02/curzon-madman-cineart-film-development-fund-1202859067/
https://apnews.com/23a16f9d37b9bab3050acda880045c76
https://www.cnnphilippines.com/entertainment/2020/1/20/Parasite-Screen-Actors-Guild-best-ensemble-award.html
http://www.donga.com/news/article/all/20200114/99210731/1
https://www.classicfm.com/discover-music/periods-genres/film-tv/parasite-music-soundtrack-italian-song-jung-jae-il/
https://www.forbes.com/sites/joanmacdonald/2019/12/17/bong-joon-hos-glass-of-soju-nominated-for-oscar-song-shortlist/#60d3425c158c
https://open.spotify.com/album/2XRuEEbhMF9Q4TcJBw4GqP?si=XrCiwc7QTYylxS-AGymaHg
https://www.amazon.com/Parasite-Original-Motion-Picture-Soundtrack/dp/B07YVHQ929
https://deadline.com/2020/02/sonic-the-hedgehog-birds-of-prey-will-ferrell-downhill-valentines-day-box-office-1202860119/
https://www.tournews21.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=41207
http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/society/society_general/928295.html
https://www.sisaweekly.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=30764
http://www.consumerwide.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=38071
https://tropicsofmeta.com/2020/02/17/reading-colonialism-in-parasite/
https://deadline.com/2020/02/sonic-the-hedgehog-opening-birds-of-prey-global-international-box-office-1202860971/
https://variety.com/2020/film/news/parasite-imax-remaster-release-1203509462/
https://variety.com/2020/film/news/parasite-release-theaters-oscars-neon-1203499975/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200211025249/https://variety.com/2020/film/news/parasite-release-theaters-oscars-neon-1203499975/
https://www.the-numbers.com/box-office-chart/weekend/2020/02/14
https://www.smh.com.au/culture/movies/parasite-takes-second-bite-at-local-box-office-20200218-p541so.html
http://www.donga.com/en/east/article/all/20200218/1982094/1/Revenue-of-Parasite-increases-by-234-in-North-America
https://www.mk.co.kr/news/culture/view/2020/02/137098/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200212063116/https://fromtheintercom.com/interview-director-bong-joon-ho/
https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v42/n03/michael-wood/at-the-movies
https://www.oscars.org/oscars/92nd-oscars-shortlists
https://iffr.com/en/2020/films/parasite-bw-version
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bong-joon-ho-black-white-parasite-cut-1274862
http://www.theshiznit.co.uk/review/review-parasite-delves-into-the-darkest-recesses-of-humanity.php
https://www.theverge.com/2020/2/24/21150977/parasite-movie-streaming-hulu-april-oscars-neon-bong-joon-ho
https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2019/10/bong-joon-ho-parasite-interview/600007/
https://variety.com/2018/film/asia/bong-joon-ho-parasite-shooting-1202825038/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190430121851/https://variety.com/2018/film/asia/bong-joon-ho-parasite-shooting-1202825038/
https://en.yna.co.kr/view/AEN20190725009700315
https://www.mk.co.kr/news/culture/view/2020/02/146969
http://www.koreanfilm.or.kr/eng/news/reports.jsp?blbdComCd=601008&seq=569&mode=VIEW
http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/nation/2020/02/398_284031.html
https://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2020/02/martin-scorsese-killers-of-the-flower-moon-everyth.html#plot
http://www.donga.com/news/article/all/20200210/99620253/1
http://news.jtbc.joins.com/article/article.aspx?news_id=NB11935412
https://www.hankookilbo.com/News/Read/202002152060093417
https://www.mk.co.kr/news/realestate/view/2020/02/168236/
https://www.vulture.com/2019/10/parasite-movie-choi-woo-shik-bong-joon-ho-ending.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20191209182409/https://www.vulture.com/2019/10/parasite-movie-choi-woo-shik-bong-joon-ho-ending.html
https://www.goldderby.com/article/2020/parasite-palme-dor-winner-best-picture-oscar/
https://www.gqindia.com/entertainment/content/oscar-winning-movie-parasite-stream-amazon-prime-video
https://web.archive.org/web/20200217011351/https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2019/10/bong-joon-ho-parasite-interview/600007/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190626230323/https://www.koreanfilm.or.kr/eng/news/news.jsp?pageIndex=2&blbdComCd=601006&seq=4849&mode=VIEW
https://web.archive.org/web/20191106032043/https://www.architecturaldigest.com/story/bong-joon-ho-parasite-movie-set-design-interview
https://web.archive.org/web/20200209090234/https://iffr.com/en/2020/films/parasite-bw-version
https://web.archive.org/web/20200213155204/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bong-joon-ho-black-white-parasite-cut-1274862
https://web.archive.org/web/20200216125628/https://www.classicfm.com/discover-music/periods-genres/film-tv/parasite-music-soundtrack-italian-song-jung-jae-il/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191223164913/https://www.forbes.com/sites/joanmacdonald/2019/12/17/bong-joon-hos-glass-of-soju-nominated-for-oscar-song-shortlist/#60d3425c158c
https://web.archive.org/web/20191217011602/https://oscars.org/oscars/92nd-oscars-shortlists
https://web.archive.org/web/20200218055749/https://tropicsofmeta.com/2020/02/17/reading-colonialism-in-parasite/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200212200908/https://www.gq.com/story/bong-joon-ho-breaks-down-parasites-wild-ending
https://web.archive.org/web/20200213063431/https://ew.com/movies/2019/10/23/parasite-bong-joon-ho-ending-explained/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200218010457/https://www.the-numbers.com/box-office-chart/weekend/2020/02/14
https://web.archive.org/web/20200220201432/https://variety.com/2020/film/news/parasite-imax-remaster-release-1203509462/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200213201609/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/parasite-join-criterion-collection-1279250
https://web.archive.org/web/20200213201605/https://bloody-disgusting.com/home-video/3604763/bong-joon-hos-parasite-memories-murder-joining-criterion-collection/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200225133837/https://www.theverge.com/2020/2/24/21150977/parasite-movie-streaming-hulu-april-oscars-neon-bong-joon-ho
https://web.archive.org/web/20200331071659/https://www.gqindia.com/entertainment/content/oscar-winning-movie-parasite-stream-amazon-prime-video
https://web.archive.org/web/20200215000134/https://deadline.com/2020/02/sonic-the-hedgehog-birds-of-prey-will-ferrell-downhill-valentines-day-box-office-1202860119/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200226193202/http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/nation/2020/02/398_284031.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200211181658/https://deadline.com/2020/02/parasite-record-breaking-uk-box-office-debut-1202856229/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200215022744/https://deadline.com/2020/02/curzon-madman-cineart-film-development-fund-1202859067/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200217122710/https://deadline.com/2020/02/sonic-the-hedgehog-opening-birds-of-prey-global-international-box-office-1202860971/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200224015958/http://www.donga.com/en/east/article/all/20200218/1982094/1/Revenue-of-Parasite-increases-by-234-in-North-America
https://web.archive.org/web/20200226230249/https://lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v42/n03/michael-wood/at-the-movies
https://web.archive.org/web/20200228210905/http://www.theshiznit.co.uk/review/review-parasite-delves-into-the-darkest-recesses-of-humanity.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20200214013840/https://apnews.com/23a16f9d37b9bab3050acda880045c76
https://web.archive.org/web/20200214051258/https://www.cnnphilippines.com/entertainment/2020/1/20/Parasite-Screen-Actors-Guild-best-ensemble-award.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200114232449/http://www.donga.com/news/article/all/20200114/99210731/1
https://web.archive.org/web/20200328161439/https://www.goldderby.com/article/2020/parasite-palme-dor-winner-best-picture-oscar/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200227155546/https://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2020/02/martin-scorsese-killers-of-the-flower-moon-everyth.html#plot
https://web.archive.org/web/20200224020123/https://www.mk.co.kr/news/culture/view/2020/02/137098/
https://blog.frame.io/2020/01/13/parasite-design-and-vfx/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200313223207/https://entertain.naver.com/read?oid=001&aid=0011373001
https://www.washingtonpost.com/arts-entertainment/2019/10/24/unpacking-metaphorical-ending-parasite/?outputType=amp
https://deadline.com/2020/04/biggest-movie-profits-small-films-2019-list-parasite-good-boy-escape-room-1202919181/
https://movie.naver.com/movie/bi/mi/basic.nhn?code=161967
https://web.archive.org/web/20190408034341/https://movie.naver.com/movie/bi/mi/basic.nhn%3Fcode=161967
https://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/2020/06/04/entertainment/movies/Daejong-Film-Awards-Parasite-five-trophies/20200604190300206.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200330140958/https://blog.frame.io/2020/01/13/parasite-design-and-vfx/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200428111628/https://deadline.com/2020/04/biggest-movie-profits-small-films-2019-list-parasite-good-boy-escape-room-1202919181/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200607045237/https://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/2020/06/04/entertainment/movies/Daejong-Film-Awards-Parasite-five-trophies/20200604190300206.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20191204002650/https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt6751668/
https://www.worldofreel.com/blog/2020/1/parasite-black-and-white-version-gets-us-release-date-via-neon-1
https://www.curzonartificialeye.com/parasite-black-and-white-edition/
https://www.criterion.com/films/30619-parasite
https://www.indiewire.com/2020/07/parasite-criterion-october-4k-remaster-black-and-white-edition-1234574188/
http://staticmultimedia.com/entertainment/music/sacred-bones-announces-vinyl-release-of-parasite-soundtrack/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q61448040#identifiers
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX4912056
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb178756224
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb178756224
https://viaf.org/viaf/224414729
https://web.archive.org/web/20200902120518/https://www.worldofreel.com/blog/2020/1/parasite-black-and-white-version-gets-us-release-date-via-neon-1
https://web.archive.org/web/20200720003518/https://www.curzonartificialeye.com/parasite-black-and-white-edition/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200715175544/https://www.criterion.com/films/30619-parasite
https://pulsenews.co.kr/view.php?year=2020&no=167522
https://www.indiewire.com/2020/03/bong-joon-ho-exhaustion-oscar-season-1202215915/
https://thecarletonian.com/2020/05/30/meet-the-russian-major-carl-who-wound-up-translating-parasite-a-conversation-with-darcy-paquet-95/
https://hyperallergic.com/541820/bonghive/
https://www.indiewire.com/2019/12/best-movies-2019-critics-survey-poll-performances-parasite-adam-driver-lupita-nyongo-1202197615/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191216162724/https://www.indiewire.com/2019/12/best-movies-2019-critics-survey-poll-performances-parasite-adam-driver-lupita-nyongo-1202197615/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200319030723/https://www.indiewire.com/2020/03/bong-joon-ho-exhaustion-oscar-season-1202215915/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200608105912/https://thecarletonian.com/2020/05/30/meet-the-russian-major-carl-who-wound-up-translating-parasite-a-conversation-with-darcy-paquet-95/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200916153105/https://www.facebook.com/madmanfilms/photos/a.196868033666540/2479620522057935/?type=3&theater=
https://web.archive.org/web/20200916153218/https://www.facebook.com/madmanfilms/photos/a.196868033666540/2537566332930020/?type=3&theater=
https://web.archive.org/web/20200916153345/https://www.facebook.com/madmanfilms/photos/a.196868033666540/2850457264974257/?type=3&theater=
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915130622/https://www.smh.com.au/culture/movies/parasite-takes-second-bite-at-local-box-office-20200218-p541so.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915131206/https://pulsenews.co.kr/view.php?year=2020&no=167522
https://web.archive.org/web/20200308210621/https://hyperallergic.com/541820/bonghive/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200303090704/https://www.mk.co.kr/news/culture/view/2020/02/146969
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915122318/https://www.tournews21.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=41207
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915122841/http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/society/society_general/928295.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915123606/https://www.sisaweekly.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=30764
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915124032/http://www.consumerwide.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=38071
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915124633/http://www.donga.com/news/article/all/20200210/99620253/1
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915125118/http://news.jtbc.joins.com/article/article.aspx?news_id=NB11935412
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915125845/https://www.hankookilbo.com/News/Read/202002152060093417
https://web.archive.org/web/20200915130008/https://www.mk.co.kr/news/realestate/view/2020/02/168236/
https://www.premiumbeat.com/blog/parasite-editor-jinmo-yang/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190204013817/https://www.koreanfilm.or.kr/eng/news/news.jsp?pageIndex=1&blbdComCd=601006&seq=5013&mode=VIEW
https://www.koreanfilm.or.kr/eng/news/news.jsp?pageIndex=1&blbdComCd=601006&seq=5013&mode=VIEW
https://www.festival-cannes.com/en/festival/films/gisaengchung
https://web.archive.org/web/20190903091243/http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/festival/films/gisaengchung
https://www.hankyung.com/entertainment/article/2019060326461
https://web.archive.org/web/20190626173250/https://www.hankyung.com/entertainment/article/2019060326461
https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/gi-saeng-chung-(South-Korea)-(2019)
https://web.archive.org/web/20191204002650/https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/gi-saeng-chung-(South-Korea)-(2019)
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bong-joon-ho-says-parasite-series-will-explore-stories-happen-between-sequences-film-1269871
https://collider.com/parasite-hbo-series-cast-mark-ruffalo/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2020/03/12/parasite-mark-ruffalo-whitewashing/
https://www.theilluminerdi.com/2020/02/13/tilda-swinton-parasite/
https://viaf.org/viaf/9567158127402015150002
https://www.cinemablend.com/news/2491028/parasites-peach-scene-was-based-on-a-real-thing-that-happened-to-bong-joon-hos-friend
https://collider.com/parasite-digital-release-date-bluray-dvd-release-date/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200918165605/https://en.yna.co.kr/view/AEN20190725009700315
https://web.archive.org/web/20210415171743/https://www.cinemablend.com/news/2491028/parasites-peach-scene-was-based-on-a-real-thing-that-happened-to-bong-joon-hos-friend
https://web.archive.org/web/20200927110626/https://www.premiumbeat.com/blog/parasite-editor-jinmo-yang/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200929141941/http://staticmultimedia.com/entertainment/music/sacred-bones-announces-vinyl-release-of-parasite-soundtrack/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210415172350/https://collider.com/parasite-digital-release-date-bluray-dvd-release-date/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200716171434/https://www.indiewire.com/2020/07/parasite-criterion-october-4k-remaster-black-and-white-edition-1234574188/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200121174614/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/bong-joon-ho-says-parasite-series-will-explore-stories-happen-between-sequences-film-1269871
https://web.archive.org/web/20200211105309/https://collider.com/parasite-hbo-series-cast-mark-ruffalo/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200313170641/https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2020/03/12/parasite-mark-ruffalo-whitewashing/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200303002612/https://www.theilluminerdi.com/2020/02/13/tilda-swinton-parasite/
https://www.cinemablend.com/news/2489909/bong-joon-ho-thanks-martin-scorsese-and-quentin-tarantino-during-classy-oscar-acceptance-speech
https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/movies/story/2020-02-09/oscars-parasite-best-picture-glass-ceiling
https://hypebeast.com/2020/4/nongshim-spicy-chapaguri-parasite-ram-don-release-info
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q61448040#P1562
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q61448040#P5108
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q61448040#P345
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q61448040#P3704
https://www.madmanfilms.com.au/parasite
https://archive.today/20200719140520/https://www.madmanfilms.com.au/parasite/
https://www.parasite-movie.com/
https://archive.today/20200719140526/https://www.parasite-movie.com/
https://www.parasitemovie.co.uk/
https://archive.today/20200719140529/https://www.parasitemovie.co.uk/
https://pmcdeadline2.files.wordpress.com/2020/01/parasite-script.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20200109045755/https://pmcdeadline2.files.wordpress.com/2020/01/parasite-script.pdf
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v716252
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt6751668/
https://www.kmdb.or.kr/eng/db/kor/detail/movie/K/17748
https://www.criterion.com/current/posts/7158-parasite-notes-from-the-underground
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2020/feb/10/parasite-best-picture-new-era-for-oscars
https://web.archive.org/web/20200618003809/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2020/feb/10/parasite-best-picture-new-era-for-oscars
https://www.oscars.org/oscars/rules-eligibility
https://web.archive.org/web/20200108163338/https://www.oscars.org/oscars/rules-eligibility
https://deadline.com/2021/12/greatest-screenplays-of-21st-century-list-writers-guild-get-out-1234885622/
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987008397376905171
https://doi.org/10.1080/15210960.2020.1748995
https://web.archive.org/web/20210126020325/https://open.spotify.com/album/2XRuEEbhMF9Q4TcJBw4GqP?si=XrCiwc7QTYylxS-AGymaHg
https://web.archive.org/web/20210311151706/https://www.amazon.com/Parasite-Original-Motion-Picture-Soundtrack/dp/B07YVHQ929
https://web.archive.org/web/20200723034935/http://koreanfilm.or.kr/eng/news/reports.jsp?blbdComCd=601008&seq=569&mode=VIEW
https://web.archive.org/web/20200207134822/http://news.kbs.co.kr/news/view.do?ncd=4376313
https://web.archive.org/web/20211001142323/https://www.kofic.or.kr/kofic/business/board/selectBoardDetail.do?boardNumber=4&boardSeqNumber=49491
https://web.archive.org/web/20200219060102/https://www.cinemablend.com/news/2489909/bong-joon-ho-thanks-martin-scorsese-and-quentin-tarantino-during-classy-oscar-acceptance-speech
https://web.archive.org/web/20200210065600/https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/movies/story/2020-02-09/oscars-parasite-best-picture-glass-ceiling
https://web.archive.org/web/20210511090139/https://hypebeast.com/2020/4/nongshim-spicy-chapaguri-parasite-ram-don-release-info
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt6751668/
https://www.bfi.org.uk/industry-data-insights/statistical-yearbook
https://www.billboard.com/music/music-news/parasite-music-director-jung-jaeil-interview-9329037/
https://www.polygon.com/2020/4/8/21213782/parasite-score-jung-jae-il-interview-bong-joon-ho-belt-of-faith
https://open.spotify.com/album/2YiZNBqcSai8kbqu7Mx0lQ
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:219440739
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/transcript-bong-joon-ho-best-director-oscars-2020-acceptance-speech-1277808/
https://variety.com/2022/film/columns/julia-roberts-superhero-george-clooney-ticket-to-paradise-1235406738/
http://cinej.pitt.edu/ojs/index.php/cinej/article/view/291
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237775092
https://www.hancinema.net/korean_movie_Parasite.php
https://doi.org/10.5195%2Fcinej.2021.291
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/2158-8724
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F15210960.2020.1748995
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/1521-0960
https://www.indiewire.com/2023/03/best-picture-oscars-should-only-go-american-films-says-cannes-head-1234823508/
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no2020015876
https://web.archive.org/web/20211206184612/https://deadline.com/2021/12/greatest-screenplays-of-21st-century-list-writers-guild-get-out-1234885622/
https://variety.com/lists/best-movies-of-all-time/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/lists/best-movies-21st-century/
https://brill.com/display/title/62309?language=en
https://web.archive.org/web/20221221181037/https://variety.com/lists/best-movies-of-all-time/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230618235113/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/lists/best-movies-21st-century
https://web.archive.org/web/20230831162641/https://open.spotify.com/album/2YiZNBqcSai8kbqu7Mx0lQ
https://web.archive.org/web/20221104021737/https://cinej.pitt.edu/ojs/index.php/cinej/article/view/291
https://web.archive.org/web/20220427095000/https://core-cms.bfi.org.uk/media/12815/download
https://web.archive.org/web/20220815033052/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/transcript-bong-joon-ho-best-director-oscars-2020-acceptance-speech-1277808/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230328171509/https://www.indiewire.com/2023/03/best-picture-oscars-should-only-go-american-films-says-cannes-head-1234823508/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221020161226/https://variety.com/2022/film/columns/julia-roberts-superhero-george-clooney-ticket-to-paradise-1235406738/
https://dbn.bn.org.pl/descriptor-details/9810803454205606
