Pulp Fiction
Pulp Fiction is a 1994 American crime film written and directed by Quentin Tarantino from a story he conceived with Roger Avary. It tells four intertwining tales of crime and violence in Los Angeles, California. The film stars John Travolta, Samuel L. Jackson, Bruce Willis, Tim Roth, Ving Rhames, and Uma Thurman. The title refers to the pulp magazines and hardboiled crime novels popular during the mid-20th century, known for their graphic violence and punchy dialogue.
Tarantino wrote Pulp Fiction in 1992 and 1993, incorporating scenes that Avary originally wrote for True Romance (1993). Its plot occurs out of chronological order. The film is also self-referential from its opening moments, beginning with a title card that gives two dictionary definitions of "pulp". Considerable screen time is devoted to monologues and casual conversations with eclectic dialogue revealing each character's perspectives on several subjects, and the film features an ironic combination of humor and strong violence. TriStar Pictures reportedly turned down the script as "too demented". Miramax co-chairman Harvey Weinstein was enthralled, however, and the film became the first that Miramax fully financed.
Pulp Fiction won the Palme d'Or at the 1994 Cannes Film Festival and was a major critical and commercial success. It was nominated for seven awards at the 67th Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and won Best Original Screenplay; it earned Travolta, Jackson, and Thurman Academy Award nominations and boosted their careers. Its development, marketing, distribution, and profitability had a sweeping effect on independent cinema.
Pulp Fiction is widely regarded as Tarantino's magnum opus, with particular praise for its screenwriting. The self-reflexivity, unconventional structure, and extensive homage and pastiche have led critics to describe it as a touchstone of postmodern film. It is often considered a cultural watershed, influencing films and other media that adopted elements of its style. The cast was also widely praised, with Travolta, Thurman, and Jackson earning particular acclaim. In 2008, Entertainment Weekly named it the best film since 1983 and it has appeared on many critics' lists of the greatest films ever made. In 2013, Pulp Fiction was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".


== Plot ==


=== Narrative structure ===
Pulp Fiction's narrative is told out of chronological order and follows three main interrelated stories that each have a different protagonist: Vincent Vega, a hitman; Butch Coolidge, a prizefighter; and Jules Winnfield, Vincent's business partner.The film begins with a diner hold-up staged by a couple, then begins to shift from one storyline to another before returning to the diner for the conclusion. There are seven narrative sequences; the three primary storylines are preceded by intertitles:

"Prologue – The Diner" (i)
Prelude to "Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife"
"Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife"
Prelude to "The Gold Watch" (a – flashback, b – present)
"The Gold Watch"
"The Bonnie Situation"
"Epilogue – The Diner" (ii)If the seven sequences were ordered chronologically, they would run: 4a, 2, 6, 1, 7, 3, 4b, 5. Sequences 1 and 7 partially overlap and are presented from different points of view, as do sequences 2 and 6. According to Philip Parker, the structural form is "an episodic narrative with circular events adding a beginning and end and allowing references to elements of each separate episode to be made throughout the narrative". Other analysts describe the structure as a "circular narrative".


=== Summary ===
Hitmen Jules Winnfield and Vincent Vega arrive at an apartment to retrieve a briefcase for their boss, gangster Marsellus Wallace, from a business partner, Brett. After Vincent checks the contents of the briefcase, Jules shoots one of Brett's associates. He declaims a passage from the Bible, and he and Vincent kill Brett for trying to double-cross Marsellus.


==== "Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife" ====
Jules and Vincent arrive at a bar to give the briefcase to Marsellus, and wait while he bribes boxer Butch Coolidge to take a dive in his upcoming match.
The next day, Vincent purchases heroin from his drug dealer, Lance. He shoots up and drives to meet Marsellus's trophy wife, Mia, having agreed to escort her while Marsellus is out of town. They eat at Jack Rabbit Slim's, a 1950s-themed restaurant, and participate in a twist contest, then return home. While Vincent is in the bathroom, Mia finds his heroin, mistakes it for cocaine, and snorts it, resulting in an overdose. Vincent rushes her to Lance's house, where they revive her with an injection of adrenaline into her heart. Vincent drops Mia off at her home, and the two agree they will never tell Marsellus about the incident.


==== "The Gold Watch" ====
Butch bets the bribe money on himself and double-crosses Marsellus, winning the bout but also accidentally killing his opponent. He prepares to flee with his girlfriend, Fabienne, but discovers she has forgotten to pack a gold watch passed down to him through his family. Returning to his apartment to retrieve it, he notices a gun on the kitchen counter and hears the toilet flush. When Vincent exits the bathroom, Butch shoots him dead and departs.
When Marsellus spots Butch stopped at a traffic light, Butch rams his car into him, then gets hit by an oncoming vehicle, leaving both of them injured and dazed. Once Marsellus regains consciousness, he shoots at Butch, chasing him into a pawnshop. Butch gains the upper hand and is about to shoot Marsellus, but the shop owner, Maynard, captures them at gunpoint and binds and gags them in the basement. Maynard and his accomplice Zed take Marsellus into another room and begin to rape him, leaving the "gimp" – a silent figure in a bondage suit – to watch over Butch. Butch breaks loose and knocks the gimp unconscious. Instead of fleeing, he decides to save Marsellus, and arms himself with a katana from the pawnshop. He kills Maynard and has a standoff with Zed, giving Marsellus a chance to free himself.  Marsellus then shoots Zed with Maynard's shotgun. Marsellus informs Butch that they are even, and to tell no one about the rape and to depart Los Angeles forever. Butch picks up Fabienne on Zed's motorcycle, and they ride away.


==== "The Bonnie Situation" ====
The scene returns to the apartment after the killing of Brett. Another man bursts out of the bathroom and fires at Jules and Vincent, but every shot misses; in return, they shoot him dead. While driving away with Brett's associate Marvin, Jules professes that their survival was a miracle, which Vincent disputes. By accident, Vincent fatally shoots Marvin in the face, covering Vincent, Jules, and the car interior in blood. They hide the car at the home of Jules's friend Jimmie, who demands they deal with the problem before his wife comes home. Marsellus sends a cleaner, Winston Wolfe, who directs Jules and Vincent to clean the car, hide the body in the trunk, dispose of their bloody clothes, and take the car to a junkyard.
At a diner, Jules tells Vincent that he plans to retire from his life of crime, convinced that their "miraculous" survival at the apartment was a sign of divine intervention. While Vincent is in the bathroom, "Pumpkin" and "Honey Bunny", a pair of robbers seen at the beginning of the film, hold up the restaurant and demand Marsellus's briefcase. Jules overpowers Pumpkin and holds him at gunpoint; Honey Bunny becomes hysterical and points her gun at Jules. Vincent returns with his gun aimed at her, but Jules defuses the situation. He recites the biblical passage, expresses ambivalence about his life of crime, and allows the robbers to take his cash and leave. Jules and Vincent leave the diner with the briefcase in hand. 


== Cast ==
John Travolta as Vincent Vega:Jules' partner-in-crime, working for Marsellus Wallace. Tarantino cast Travolta in Pulp Fiction because Michael Madsen, who had played Vic Vega in Reservoir Dogs, chose to appear in Kevin Costner's Wyatt Earp instead. Madsen has since expressed regret over his decision. Harvey Weinstein pushed for Daniel Day-Lewis in the part. Travolta accepted a reduced rate; sources say either US$100,000 or US$140,000. The film's success and his Academy Award nomination for Best Actor revitalized his career. Vincent is the brother of Vic Vega, also known as Mr. Blonde in Reservoir Dogs (1992), and in 2004, Tarantino discussed an idea for a movie starring Travolta and Madsen as the "Vega Brothers"; the concept remains unrealized.Samuel L. Jackson as Jules Winnfield:Vincent's partner in crime, working for Marsellus Wallace. Jackson's first audition was overshadowed by Paul Calderón; Jackson had assumed the audition was merely a reading. Weinstein convinced him to audition a second time and his performance of the final diner scene won over Tarantino. Jules was originally scripted with a giant afro, but Tarantino's PA mistakenly bought a Jheri curled wig. Tarantino was enraged but Jackson persuaded him to keep it since the hairstyle had gained popularity through the rap group N.W.A. Film critic Owen Gleiberman took it as a "tacit comic statement about the ghettoization of [Black people] in movies". Jackson received an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor. Calderón appears in the film as Paul, a bartender at Marsellus's social club, as well as Marsellus's assistant. Tarantino wrote the role for Laurence Fishburne, who turned it down. According to Tarantino, Fishburne refused it because his team did not see it as a starring role; Fishburne later said he turned it down because he felt the film glamorized heroin.Uma Thurman as Mia Wallace:Wallace's wife and an aspiring actress. Miramax favored Holly Hunter or Meg Ryan for the role of Mia. Alfre Woodard and Meg Tilly were also considered but Tarantino wanted Thurman after their first meeting. She dominated the film's promotional material, appearing on a bed with cigarette in hand. She was nominated for an Oscar for Best Supporting Actress. Despite being launched into the celebrity A-list, Thurman chose not to do any big-budget films until Batman & Robin (1997) three years later.Harvey Keitel as Winston Wolfe:A "cleaner" who aids Jules and Vincent. Tarantino wrote the part of Wolfe for Keitel, who had starred in Reservoir Dogs and was instrumental in its production. In Tarantino's words, "Harvey had been my favorite actor since I was 16 years old." Keitel had played a similarly employed character in Point of No Return (1993).Tim Roth as Ringo/"Pumpkin":A burglar and Yolanda's boyfriend. Roth had starred in Reservoir Dogs alongside Keitel. He had used an American accent in Reservoir Dogs but used his natural, London accent in Pulp Fiction. Though Tarantino had written the part with Roth in mind, TriStar head Mike Medavoy preferred Johnny Depp or Christian Slater. Early in development, Tarantino had contemplated casting Roth as Vincent and Gary Oldman as Jules, rewriting the characters as "two English guys".Amanda Plummer as Yolanda/"Honey Bunny":Ringo's girlfriend and partner in crime. Tarantino wrote the role of Yolanda for Plummer to partner her with Roth. Roth had introduced Tarantino to her, saying: "I want to work with Amanda in one of your films but she has to have a really big gun."Maria de Medeiros as Fabienne:Butch's girlfriend. Tarantino met de Medeiros, a Portuguese actress, while traveling with Reservoir Dogs around the European film festival circuit.Ving Rhames as Marsellus Wallace:A crime boss and employer of Jules and Vincent. Before Rhames was cast, the part of Wallace was initially offered to Max Julien and Sid Haig, but both turned down the role. According to Bender, Rhames gave "one of the best auditions I've ever seen". His acclaimed performance led to him being cast in big-budget features such as Mission Impossible (1996), Con Air (1997) and Out of Sight (1998).Eric Stoltz as Lance:Vincent's drug dealer. Gary Oldman was the preferred choice among TriStar executives, based on his portrayal of drug-dealing pimp Drexl Spivey in True Romance (1993).Rosanna Arquette as Jody:Lance's wife. Pam Grier read for the role, but Tarantino did not believe audiences would find it plausible for Lance to yell at her. Tarantino later cast Grier as the lead role for Jackie Brown. Ellen DeGeneres also read for the part of Jody. Rosanna's sister Alexis (then known as Robert Arquette) also appears in the film, as a man emerging from a bathroom to shoot at and miss Vincent and Jules who then kill him.Christopher Walken as Captain Koons:A USAF veteran of the Vietnam War who delivers a young Butch his father's coveted gold watch. During Koons' monologue, which is interspersed with colorful descriptions of the Viet Cong, he mentions a soldier called "Winocki". Joe Winocki (John Garfield) is a character in the 1943 film Air Force directed by Howard Hawks, one of Tarantino's favorite directors. Tarantino played a character named Desmond Winocki in a guest appearance on an episode of All-American Girl titled Pulp Sitcom.Bruce Willis as Butch Coolidge:An aging boxer on the run from Marsellus having double-crossed him. Willis was already a star but most of his recent films had been critical and box-office disappointments. As related by Peter Bart, participating in the modestly budgeted film "meant lowering his salary and risking his star status but the strategy ... paid off royally: Pulp Fiction not only brought Willis new respect as an actor but also earned him several million dollars". Willis' appearance and physical presence were crucial to Tarantino, "Bruce has the look of a 50s actor. I can't think of any other star that has that look". Butch's look was modeled on Aldo Ray in Nightfall and his demeanor based on Ralph Meeker's portrayal of Mike Hammer in Robert Aldrich's Kiss Me Deadly. Chandler Lindauer plays a young Butch.Bronagh Gallagher plays Jody's friend Trudi who does little but smoke a bong during the scene where Vincent revives Mia. According to author Jason Bailey, "Quentin thought it would be funny to have this casual observer who just happened to be there. All of this was born out of the experience of, when you go to someone's house to buy drugs, there are always people who are just there". Phil LaMarr portrays Marvin, an associate of Jules and Vincent. LaMarr auditioned for Tarantino after both had done a show for an improv group a few months prior. He read for the roles of Jules Winnfield and Brett before being cast as Marvin. Tarantino appears as Jules' friend Jimmie, in whose house they clean up a murder. Tarantino was unsure whether to play Jimmie or Lance, choosing Jimmie as he wanted to be behind the camera during Mia's overdose scene.Frank Whaley portrays Brett, who has a briefcase requested by Marcellus. Whaley met Tarantino while he was filming Reservoir Dogs at a lab in Sundance Institute. He recalls, "we ended up meeting and spending time together, and I liked him, so I was really happy when he asked me to be in this movie." Burr Steers appears as Roger, a friend of Brett's nicknamed "Flock of Seagulls" by Jules. The scene of the confrontation between Brett and Jules went through several takes due to Steers making mistakes. Steers recalled in an interview that he had found acting difficult due to the loudness of the gunshots.Angela Jones portrays Esmarelda Villalobos, a cab driver who aids Butch's escape. Her casting and character were inspired by her performance in the 1991 short film Curdled, later remade as a 1996 feature film with finance from Tarantino and again starring Jones. Duane Whitaker, Peter Greene and Stephen Hibbert play Maynard, Zed and the gimp. According to The Daily Beast, these "three psycho hillbillies" that rape Marsellus in Maynard's shop's basement allude to the film Deliverance. Steve Buscemi makes a cameo appearance as a waiter at Jack Rabbit Slim's, dressed as Buddy Holly. Buscemi, who had appeared in Reservoir Dogs, was originally considered for the role of Jimmie but was unable to commit. Kathy Griffin appears as herself. Michael Gilden and Joseph Pilato also appear at Jack Rabbit Slim's as waiter Phillip Morris Page and a Dean Martin impersonator, respectively. Emil Sitka made a cameo via posthumous archive footage, Karen Maruyama appears as "Gawker #1" after Butch's car accident, and Julia Sweeney portrays Raquel, the daughter of the owner of the junkyard in which Marvin's body is disposed of. Producer Lawrence Bender makes a cameo as a victim of the diner robbery, credited as "Long Hair Yuppie-Scum". Jerome Patrick Hoban appears in the Jack Rabbit Slim's segment as an Ed Sullivan impersonator. Susan Griffiths appears alongside Hoban as a Marilyn Monroe impersonator.


== Production ==


=== Writing ===
Roger Avary wrote the first element of what would become the Pulp Fiction screenplay in the fall of 1990:

Tarantino and Avary decided to write a short, on the theory that it would be easier to get made than a feature. But they quickly realized that nobody produces shorts, so the film became a trilogy, with one section by Tarantino, one by Avary, and one by a third director who never materialized. Each eventually expanded his section into a feature-length script.
The initial inspiration was the three-part horror anthology film Black Sabbath (1963), by Italian filmmaker Mario Bava. The Tarantino–Avary project was provisionally titled "Black Mask", after the seminal hardboiled crime fiction magazine. Tarantino's script was produced as Reservoir Dogs, his directorial debut; Avary created the basis for the "Gold Watch" storyline of Pulp Fiction.With work on Reservoir Dogs completed, Tarantino returned to the notion of a trilogy film: "I got the idea of doing something that novelists get a chance to do but filmmakers don't: telling three separate stories, having characters float in and out with different weights depending on the story." Tarantino explains that the idea "was basically to take like the oldest chestnuts that you've ever seen when it comes to crime stories – the oldest stories in the book ... You know, 'Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife' – the oldest story about ... the guy's gotta go out with the big man's wife and don't touch her. You know, you've seen the story a zillion times." "I'm using old forms of storytelling and then purposely having them run awry", he says. "Part of the trick is to take these movie characters, these genre characters and these genre situations and actually apply them to some of real life's rules and see how they unravel." In at least one case, boxer Butch Coolidge, Tarantino had in mind a specific character from a classic Hollywood crime story: "I wanted him to be basically like Ralph Meeker as Mike Hammer in Aldrich's Kiss Me Deadly [1955]. I wanted him to be a bully and a jerk".Tarantino went to work on the script for Pulp Fiction in Amsterdam in March 1992, possibly at the Winston Hotel in the Red Light District. He was joined there by Avary, who contributed "Pandemonium Reigns" to the project and participated in its rewriting as well as the development of the new storylines that would link up with it. Two scenes originally written by Avary for the True Romance screenplay, exclusively credited to Tarantino, were incorporated into the opening of "The Bonnie Situation": the "miraculous" missed shots by the hidden gunman and the rear seat automobile killing. The notion of the crimeworld "cleaner" that became the heart of the episode was inspired by a short, Curdled, that Tarantino saw at a film festival. He cast the lead actress, Angela Jones, in Pulp Fiction and later backed the filmmakers' production of a feature-length version of Curdled. The script included a couple of made-up commercial brands that often featured in later Tarantino films: Big Kahuna burgers (a Big Kahuna soda cup appears in Reservoir Dogs) and Red Apple cigarettes. As he worked on the script, Tarantino also accompanied Reservoir Dogs around the European film festivals. Released in the United States in October 1992, the picture was a critical and commercial success. In January 1993, the Pulp Fiction script was complete.


=== Financing ===
Tarantino and his producer, Lawrence Bender, brought the script to Jersey Films. Before even seeing Reservoir Dogs, Jersey had attempted to sign Tarantino for his next project. Ultimately a development deal worth around $1 million had been struck: The deal gave A Band Apart, Bender and Tarantino's newly formed production company, initial financing and office facilities; Jersey got a share of the project and the right to shop the script to a studio. Jersey had a distribution and "first look" deal with Columbia TriStar, which paid Tarantino for the right to consider exercising its option. In February, Pulp Fiction appeared on a Variety list of films in pre-production at TriStar. In June, however, the studio put the script into turnaround. According to a studio executive, TriStar chief Mike Medavoy found it "too demented". There were suggestions that TriStar was resistant to back a film featuring a heroin user; there were also indications that the studio simply saw the project as too low-budget for its desired star-driven image. Avary – who was about to start shooting his own directorial debut, Killing Zoe – has said that TriStar's objections were comprehensive, encompassing the script's fundamental structure. He characterizes the studio's position: "'This is the worst thing ever written. It makes no sense. Someone's dead and then they're alive. It's too long, violent, and unfilmable.' ... So I thought, 'That's that!'"Bender brought the script to Miramax, the formerly independent studio that had recently been acquired by Disney. Harvey Weinstein – co-chairman of Miramax, along with his brother Bob – was instantly enthralled by the script and the company picked it up. Pulp Fiction, the first Miramax project to get a green light after the Disney acquisition, was budgeted at $8.5 million. It became the first movie that Miramax completely financed. Helping hold costs down was the plan Bender executed to pay all the main actors the same amount per week, regardless of their industry status. The New York Times reported, "Most of the actors received relatively small salaries along with a percentage of the profits." The biggest star to sign on to the project was Bruce Willis. Though he had recently appeared in several big-budget flops, he was still a major overseas draw. On the strength of his name, Miramax garnered $11 million for the film's worldwide rights, virtually ensuring its profitability.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography commenced on September 20, 1993. The lead offscreen talent had all worked with Tarantino on Reservoir Dogs – cinematographer Andrzej Sekuła, film editor Sally Menke, production designer David Wasco, and costume designer Betsy Heimann. According to Tarantino, "[W]e had $8 million. I wanted it to look like a $20–25 million movie. I wanted it to look like an epic. It's an epic in everything – in invention, in ambition, in length, in scope, in everything except the price tag." The film, he says, was shot "on 50 ASA film stock, which is the slowest stock they make. The reason we use it is that it creates an almost no-grain image, it's lustrous. It's the closest thing we have to 50s Technicolor." The largest chunk of the budget – $150,000 – went to creating the Jack Rabbit Slim's set.  It was built in a Culver City warehouse, where it was joined by several other sets, as well as the film's production offices. The diner sequence was shot on location in Hawthorne at the Hawthorne Grill, known for its Googie architecture. For the costumes, Tarantino took his inspiration from French director Jean-Pierre Melville, who believed that the clothes his characters wore were their symbolic suits of armor. Tarantino cast himself in a modest-sized role as he had in Reservoir Dogs. One of his pop totems, Fruit Brute, a long-discontinued General Mills cereal, also returned from the earlier film. The shoot wrapped on November 30. Before Pulp Fiction's premiere, Tarantino convinced Avary to forfeit his agreed-on cowriting credit and accept a "story by" credit, so the line "Written and directed by Quentin Tarantino" could be used in advertising and onscreen.


== Music ==

No film score was composed for Pulp Fiction; Quentin Tarantino instead used an eclectic assortment of surf music, rock and roll, soul, and pop songs. Dick Dale's rendition of "Misirlou" plays during the opening credits. Tarantino chose surf music as the basic musical style for the film, but not, he insists, because of its association with surfing culture: "To me it just sounds like rock and roll, even Morricone music. It sounds like rock and roll spaghetti Western music." Tarantino planned to use a power pop song, "My Sharona" by The Knack, during the film's rape scene, but ultimately discounted it.Some of the songs were suggested to Tarantino by his friends Chuck Kelley and Laura Lovelace, who were credited as music consultants. Lovelace also appeared in the film as Laura, a waitress; she reprises the role in Jackie Brown. The soundtrack album was released along with the film in 1994. The album peaked on the Billboard 200 chart at number 21. The single, Urge Overkill's cover of the Neil Diamond song "Girl, You'll Be a Woman Soon", reached number 59.Estella Tincknell describes how the particular combination of well-known and obscure recordings helps establish the film as a "self-consciously 'cool' text. [The] use of the mono-tracked, beat-heavy style of early 1960s U.S. 'underground' pop mixed with 'classic' ballads such as Dusty Springfield's 'Son of a Preacher Man' is crucial to the film's postmodern knowingness." She contrasts the soundtrack with that of Forrest Gump, the highest-grossing film of 1994, which also relies on period pop recordings: "[T]he version of 'the sixties' offered by Pulp Fiction ... is certainly not that of the publicly recognized counter-culture featured in Forrest Gump, but is, rather, a more genuinely marginal form of sub-culture based around a lifestyle – surfing, 'hanging' – that is resolutely apolitical." The soundtrack is central, she says, to the film's engagement with the "younger, cinematically knowledgeable spectator" it solicits.


== Release and reception ==


=== Release and box office ===
Pulp Fiction premiered in May 1994 at the Cannes Film Festival. The Weinsteins "hit the beach like commandos", bringing the picture's entire cast over. The film was unveiled at a midnight hour screening and caused a sensation. It won the Palme d'Or, the festival's top prize, generating a further wave of publicity.The first U.S. review of the film was published on May 23 in industry trade magazine Variety. Todd McCarthy called Pulp Fiction a "spectacularly entertaining piece of pop culture ... a startling, massive success." From Cannes forward, Tarantino was on the road continuously, promoting the film. Over the next few months it played in smaller festivals around Europe, building buzz: Nottingham, Munich, Taormina, Locarno, Norway, and San Sebastián. Tarantino later said, "One thing that's cool is that by breaking up the linear structure, when I watch the film with an audience, it does break [the audience's] alpha state. It's like, all of a sudden, 'I gotta watch this ... I gotta pay attention.' You can almost feel everybody moving in their seats. It's actually fun to watch an audience in some ways chase after a movie." In late September, it opened the New York Film Festival. The New York Times published its review the day of the opening. Janet Maslin called the film a "triumphant, cleverly disorienting journey through a demimonde that springs entirely from Mr. Tarantino's ripe imagination, a landscape of danger, shock, hilarity and vibrant local color ... [He] has come up with a work of such depth, wit and blazing originality that it places him in the front ranks of American film makers."On October 14, 1994, Pulp Fiction went into general release in the United States. As Peter Biskind describes, "It was not platformed, that is, it did not open in a handful of theaters and roll out slowly as word of mouth built, the traditional way of releasing an indie film; it went wide immediately, into 1,100 theaters." In the eyes of some cultural critics, Reservoir Dogs had given Tarantino a reputation for glamorizing violence. Miramax played with the issue in its marketing campaign: "You won't know the facts till you've seen the fiction", went one slogan. Pulp Fiction was the top-grossing film at the US box office its first weekend with a gross of $9,311,882, edging out a Sylvester Stallone vehicle, The Specialist, which was in its second week and playing at more than twice as many theaters. The gross claimed by Miramax was disputed by others. Warner Bros. initially reported an estimated gross of $8.9 million for The Specialist with Bob Weinstein then reporting a gross for Pulp Fiction of $9.1 million, claiming that the film was on another 100 screens that had previously been overlooked. Warners then updated their gross to $9.3 million, claiming they had made a calculation error.
Early Monday morning, Miramax reported a gross of $9.3 million with Warners reporting $8.9 million for The Specialist, placing Pulp Fiction first but other industry sources did not believe Miramax's numbers. Variety estimated that Pulp Fiction grossed $8.6 to $9 million for the weekend.Against its budget of $8.5 million and about $10 million in marketing costs, Pulp Fiction grossed $107.93 million at the U.S. box office, making it the first Miramax film to surpass $100 million in the United States and Canada. Worldwide, it took in nearly $213 million. In terms of domestic grosses, it was the tenth biggest film of 1994, even though it played on substantially fewer screens than any other film in the top 20. Popular engagement with the film, such as speculation about the contents of the precious briefcase, "indicates the kind of cult status that Pulp Fiction achieved almost immediately." As MovieMaker puts it, "The movie was nothing less than a national cultural phenomenon." Abroad, as well: in Britain, where it opened a week after its U.S. release, not only was the film a big hit, but in book form its screenplay became the most successful in UK publishing history, a top-ten bestseller.


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 92% based on 116 reviews, with an average rating of 9.20/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "One of the most influential films of the 1990s, Pulp Fiction is a delirious post-modern mix of neo-noir thrills, pitch-black humor, and pop-culture touchstones." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 95 out of 100, based on 25 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale.The response of major American film reviewers was widely favorable. Roger Ebert called it "a comedy about blood, guts, violence, strange sex, drugs, fixed fights, dead body disposal, leather freaks and a wristwatch that makes a dark journey down through the generations... The screenplay by Tarantino and Roger Avary so well-written in a scruffy, fanzine way that you want to rub noses in it – the noses of those zombie writers who take 'screenwriting' classes that teach them the formulas for 'hit films'". Richard Corliss of TIME wrote, "It towers over the year's other movies as majestically and menacingly as a gang lord at a preschool. It dares Hollywood films to be this smart about going this far. If good directors accept Tarantino's implicit challenge, the movie theater could again be a great place to live in." In Newsweek, David Ansen wrote, "The miracle of Quentin Tarantino's Pulp Fiction is how, being composed of secondhand, debased parts, it succeeds in gleaming like something new." "You get intoxicated by it," wrote Entertainment Weekly's Owen Gleiberman, "high on the rediscovery of how pleasurable a movie can be. I'm not sure I've ever encountered a filmmaker who combined discipline and control with sheer wild-ass joy the way that Tarantino does." "There's a special kick that comes from watching something this thrillingly alive", wrote Peter Travers of Rolling Stone. "Pulp Fiction is indisputably great."The Los Angeles Times was one of the few major news outlets to publish a negative review on the film's opening weekend. Kenneth Turan wrote, "The writer-director appears to be straining for his effects. Some sequences, especially one involving bondage harnesses and homosexual rape, have the uncomfortable feeling of creative desperation, of someone who's afraid of losing his reputation scrambling for any way to offend sensibilities." Some who reviewed it in the following weeks took more exception to the predominant critical reaction than to Pulp Fiction itself. While not panning the film, Stanley Kauffmann of The New Republic felt that "the way that [it] has been so widely ravened up and drooled over verges on the disgusting. Pulp Fiction nourishes, abets, cultural slumming." Responding to comparisons between Tarantino's film and the work of French New Wave director Jean-Luc Godard, especially his first, most famous feature, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader wrote, "The fact that Pulp Fiction is garnering more extravagant raves than Breathless ever did tells you plenty about which kind of cultural references are regarded as more fruitful – namely, the ones we already have and don't wish to expand." Observing in the National Review that "[n]o film arrives with more advance hype", John Simon was unswayed: "titillation cures neither hollowness nor shallowness".Debate about the film spread beyond the review pages, with its violence often being the theme. In The Washington Post, Donna Britt described how she was happy not to see Pulp Fiction on a recent weekend and thus avoid "discussing the rousing scene in which a gunshot sprays somebody's brains around a car interior". Some commentators took exception to the film's frequent use of the word "nigger" (mentioned 18 times). In the Chicago Tribune, Todd Boyd argued that the word's recurrence "has the ability to signify the ultimate level of hipness for white males who have historically used their perception of black masculinity as the embodiment of cool". In Britain, James Wood, writing in The Guardian, set the tone for much subsequent criticism: "Tarantino represents the final triumph of postmodernism, which is to empty the artwork of all content, thus avoiding its capacity to do anything except helplessly represent our agonies ... Only in this age could a writer as talented as Tarantino produce artworks so vacuous, so entirely stripped of any politics, metaphysics, or moral interest."


=== Awards season ===
Around the turn of the year, Pulp Fiction was named Best Picture by the National Society of Film Critics, National Board of Review, Los Angeles Film Critics Association, Boston Society of Film Critics, Society of Texas Film Critics, Southeastern Film Critics Association, and Kansas City Film Critics Circle. Tarantino was named Best Director by all seven of those organizations as well as by the New York Film Critics Circle and Chicago Film Critics Association. The screenplay won several prizes, with various awarding bodies ascribing credit differently. At the 52nd Golden Globe Awards, Tarantino, named as sole recipient of the Best Screenplay honor, failed to mention Avary in his acceptance speech. In February 1995, the film received seven Oscar nominations – Best Picture, Director, Actor (Travolta), Supporting Actor (Jackson), Supporting Actress (Thurman), Original Screenplay, and Film Editing. Travolta, Jackson, and Thurman were each nominated as well for the 1st Screen Actors Guild Awards, presented on February 25, but none took home the honor. At the Academy Awards ceremony the following month, Tarantino and Avary were announced as joint winners of the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. The furor around the film was still going strong: much of the March issue of Artforum was devoted to its critical dissection. Pulp Fiction garnered four honors at the Independent Spirit Awards, held at the end of the month – Best Feature, Best Director, Male Lead (Jackson), and Best Screenplay (Tarantino). At the British Academy Film Awards (BAFTA), Tarantino and Avary shared the BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay, and Jackson won for Best Supporting Actor. The film was nominated for the Grand Prix of the Belgian Film Critics Association.The February 2020 issue of New York Magazine lists Pulp Fiction alongside Citizen Kane, Sunset Boulevard, Dr. Strangelove, Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, The Conversation, Nashville, Taxi Driver, The Elephant Man, In the Bedroom, There Will Be Blood, and Roma as "The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars".


== Legacy and influence ==
Pulp Fiction quickly came to be regarded as one of the most significant films of its era. In 1995, in a special edition of Siskel & Ebert devoted to Tarantino, Gene Siskel argued that the work posed a major challenge to the "ossification of American movies with their brutal formulas". In Siskel's view,

the violent intensity of Pulp Fiction calls to mind other violent watershed films that were considered classics in their time and still are. Hitchcock's Psycho [1960], Arthur Penn's Bonnie and Clyde [1967], and Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange [1971]. Each film shook up a tired, bloated movie industry and used a world of lively lowlifes to reflect how dull other movies had become. And that, I predict, will be the ultimate honor for Pulp Fiction. Like all great films, it criticizes other movies.

Ken Dancyger writes that its "imitative and innovative style" – like that of its predecessor, Reservoir Dogs – represents

a new phenomenon, the movie whose style is created from the context of movie life rather than real life. The consequence is twofold – the presumption of deep knowledge on the part of the audience of those forms such as the gangster films or Westerns, horror films or adventure films. And that the parody or alteration of that film creates a new form, a different experience for the audience.

In a widely covered speech on May 31, 1995, Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole attacked the American entertainment industry for peddling "nightmares of depravity". Pulp Fiction was soon associated with his charges concerning gratuitous violence. Dole had not mentioned the film; he cited two less-celebrated movies based on Tarantino screenplays, Natural Born Killers and True Romance. In September 1996, Dole did accuse Pulp Fiction – which he had not seen – of promoting "the romance of heroin".Paula Rabinowitz expresses the general film industry opinion that Pulp Fiction "simultaneously resurrected John Travolta and film noir". In Peter Biskind's description, it created a "guys-with-guns frenzy". The film has also been labeled as a black comedy and a "neo-noir". Critic Geoffrey O'Brien, however, argued against the classification of Pulp Fiction into the neo-noir genre: "The old-time noir passions, the brooding melancholy and operatic death scenes, would be altogether out of place in the crisp and brightly lit wonderland that Tarantino conjures up. [It is] neither neo-noir nor a parody of noir." Similarly, Nicholas Christopher calls it "more gangland camp than neo-noir", and Foster Hirsch suggests that its "trippy fantasy landscape" characterizes it more definitively than any genre label. Regardless, the stylistic influence of Pulp Fiction soon became apparent. Less than a year after the picture's release, British critic Jon Ronson attended the National Film School's end-of-semester screenings and assessed the impact: "Out of the five student movies I watched, four incorporated violent shoot-outs over a soundtrack of iconoclastic 70s pop hits, two climaxed with all the main characters shooting each other at once, and one had two hitmen discussing the idiosyncrasies of The Brady Bunch before offing their victim. Not since Citizen Kane has one man appeared from relative obscurity to redefine the art of moviemaking." Among the first Hollywood films cited as its imitators were Destiny Turns on the Radio (1995), in which Tarantino acted, Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead (1995), and 2 Days in the Valley (1996). It "triggered a myriad of clones", writes Fiona Villella. Internationally, according to David Desser, it "not only influenced a British brand of noir, but extended the noir vision virtually around the world". Pulp Fiction's effect on film form was still reverberating in 2007, when David Denby of The New Yorker credited it with initiating the ongoing cycle of disordered cinematic narratives.According to Variety, the trajectory of Pulp Fiction from Cannes launch to commercial smash "forever altered the game" of so-called independent cinema. It "cemented Miramax's place as the reigning indie superpower", writes Biskind. "Pulp became the Star Wars of independents, exploding expectations for what an indie film could do at the box office." The film's large financial return on its small budget

transform[ed] the industry's attitude toward the lowly indies ... spawning a flock of me-too classics divisions ... [S]mart studio executives suddenly woke up to the fact that grosses and market share, which got all the press, were not the same as profits ... Once the studios realized that they could exploit the economies of (small) scale, they more or less gave up buying or remaking the films themselves, and either bought the distributors, as Disney had Miramax, or started their own ... copy[ing] Miramax's marketing and distribution strategies.

In 2001, Variety, noting the increasing number of actors switching back and forth between expensive studio films and low-budget independent or indie-style projects, suggested that the "watershed moment for movie stars" came with the decision by Willis – one of Hollywood's highest-paid performers – to appear in Pulp Fiction.It has been described as a "major cultural event", an "international phenomenon" that influenced television, music, literature, and advertising. Not long after its release, it was identified as a significant focus of attention within the growing community of Internet users. Adding Pulp Fiction to his roster of The Great Movies in 2001, Roger Ebert called it "the most influential film of the decade". Four years later, Time's Corliss wrote much the same: "(unquestionably) the most influential American movie of the 90s".Several scenes and images from the film achieved iconic status; in 2008, Entertainment Weekly declared, "You'd be hard-pressed, by now, to name a moment from Quentin Tarantino's film that isn't iconic." Jules and Vincent's "Royale with Cheese" dialogue became famous. It was referenced more than a decade and a half later in the Travolta vehicle From Paris with Love. The adrenalin shot to Mia Wallace's heart is on Premiere's list of "100 Greatest Movie Moments". The scene of Travolta and Thurman's characters dancing has been frequently homaged, most unambiguously in the 2005 film Be Cool, starring the same two actors. The image of Travolta and Jackson's characters standing side by side in suit and tie, pointing their guns, has also become widely familiar. In 2007, BBC News reported that "London transport workers have painted over an iconic mural by 'guerrilla artist' Banksy ... The image depicted a scene from Quentin Tarantino's Pulp Fiction, with Samuel L. Jackson and John Travolta clutching bananas instead of guns." Certain lines were adopted popularly as catchphrases, in particular Marsellus's threat, "I'm 'a get medieval on your ass." Jules's "Ezekiel" recitation was voted the fourth greatest movie speech of all time in a 2004 poll. One of the more notable homages to Jules "Biblical" quote was one Jackson himself played a part in, near the end of 2014's Captain America: The Winter Soldier, Jackson's character Col. Nick Fury, presumed dead, visits his own gravestone, on which, below Fury's name is inscribed "The path of the righteous man ..." Ezekiel 25:17. In 2019, it was reported that Dominic Cummings, special political adviser to British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, quoted Jules by telling Conservative MPs to "be cool like Fonzies" as political pressure built to request an extension to the date of the UK's withdrawal from the European Union.Pulp Fiction now appears in several critical assessments of all-time great films. In 2008, Entertainment Weekly named it the best film of the past quarter-century. That same year, the American Film Institute's "Ten Top Ten" poll ranked it number 7 all-time in the gangster film genre. In 2007, it was voted 94th overall on the AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies list. In 2005, it was named one of "Time's All-Time 100 Movies". As of September 2018, it is number 54 on Metacritic's list of all-time highest scores. The film ranks very highly in popular surveys. A 2008 Empire poll combining the opinions of readers, movie industry professionals, and critics named Pulp Fiction the ninth-best film of all time. In a 2006 readers' poll by the British magazine Total Film, it ranked as the number three film in history. It was voted as the fourth-greatest film of all time in a nationwide poll for Britain's Channel 4 in 2001. In 2015, Pulp Fiction ranked 28th on BBC's "100 Greatest American Films" list, voted on by film critics from around the world.


== Critical analysis ==
Tarantino has stated that he originally planned "to do a Black Mask movie", referring to the magazine largely responsible for popularizing hardboiled detective fiction. "[I]t kind of went somewhere else". Geoffrey O'Brien sees the result as connected "rather powerfully to a parallel pulp tradition: the tales of terror and the uncanny practiced by such writers as Cornell Woolrich [and] Fredric Brown ... Both dealt heavily in the realm of improbable coincidences and cruel cosmic jokes, a realm that Pulp Fiction makes its own." In particular, O'Brien finds a strong affinity between the intricate plot mechanics and twists of Brown's novels and the recursive, interweaving structure of Pulp Fiction. Philip French describes the film's narrative as a "circular movement or Möbius strip of a kind Resnais and Robbe-Grillet would admire". James Mottram regards crime novelist Elmore Leonard, whose influence Tarantino has acknowledged, as the film's primary literary antecedent. He suggests that Leonard's "rich dialogue" is reflected in Tarantino's "popular-culture-strewn jive"; he also points to the acute, extremely dark sense of humor Leonard applies to the realm of violence as a source of inspiration.Film scholar/historian Robert Kolker sees the "flourishes, the apparent witty banality of the dialogue, the goofy fracturing of temporality [as] a patina over a pastiche. The pastiche ... is essentially of two films that Tarantino can't seem to get out of his mind: Mean Streets [1973; directed by Martin Scorsese, who loved Pulp Fiction and the way the film was told] and The Killing [1956; directed by Stanley Kubrick]." He contrasts Pulp Fiction with postmodern Hollywood predecessors Hudson Hawk (1991; starring Willis) and Last Action Hero (1993; starring Arnold Schwarzenegger) that "took the joke too far ... simply mocked or suggested that they were smarter than the audience" and flopped. Todd McCarthy writes that the film's "striking widescreen compositions often contain objects in extreme close-up as well as vivid contrasts, sometimes bringing to mind the visual strategies of Sergio Leone", an acknowledged hero of Tarantino's. To Martin Rubin, the "expansive, brightly colored widescreen visuals" evoke comedy directors such as Frank Tashlin and Blake Edwards.The movie's host of pop culture allusions, ranging from the famous image of Marilyn Monroe's skirt flying up over a subway grating to Jules addressing a soon-to-be victim as "Flock of Seagulls" because of his haircut, have led many critics to discuss it within the framework of postmodernism. Describing the film in 2005 as Tarantino's "postmodern masterpiece ... to date", David Walker writes that it "is marked by its playful reverence for the 1950s ... and its constantly teasing and often deferential references to other films". He characterizes its convoluted narrative technique as "postmodern tricksiness". Calling the film a "terminally hip postmodern collage", Foster Hirsch finds Pulp Fiction far from a masterpiece: "authoritative, influential, and meaningless". Set "in a world that could exist only in the movies", it is "a succulent guilty pleasure, beautifully made junk food for cinéastes". O'Brien, dismissing attempts to associate the movie with film noir, argues that "Pulp Fiction is more a guided tour of an infernal theme park decorated with cultural detritus, Buddy Holly and Mamie Van Doren, fragments of blaxploitation and Roger Corman and Shogun Assassin, music out of a twenty-four-hour oldies station for which all the decades since the fifties exist simultaneously." Catherine Constable takes the moment in which a needle filled with adrenalin is plunged into the comatose Mia's heart as exemplary. She proposes that it "can be seen as effecting her resurrection from the dead, simultaneously recalling and undermining the Gothic convention of the vampire's stake. On this model, the referencing of previous aesthetic forms and styles moves beyond ... empty pastiche, sustaining an 'inventive and affirmative' mode of postmodernism."Mark T. Conard asks, "[W]hat is the film about?" and answers, "American nihilism." Hirsch suggests, "If the film is actually about anything other than its own cleverness, it seems dedicated to the dubious thesis that hit men are part of the human family." Richard Alleva argues that "Pulp Fiction has about as much to do with actual criminality or violence as Cyrano de Bergerac with the realities of seventeenth-century France or The Prisoner of Zenda with Balkan politics." He reads the movie as a form of romance whose allure is centered in the characters' nonnaturalistic discourse, "wise-guy literate, media-smart, obscenely epigrammatic". In Alan Stone's view, the "absurd dialogue", like that between Vincent and Jules in the scene where the former accidentally kills Marvin, "unexpectedly transforms the meaning of the violence cliché ... Pulp Fiction unmasks the macho myth by making it laughable and deheroicizes the power trip glorified by standard Hollywood violence." Stone reads the film as "politically correct. There is no nudity and no violence directed against women ... [It] celebrates interracial friendship and cultural diversity; there are strong women and strong black men, and the director swims against the current of class stereotype."Where Stone sees a celebration, Kolker finds a vacuum: "The postmodern insouciance, violence, homophobia, and racism of Pulp Fiction were perfectly acceptable because the film didn't pretend seriousness and therefore didn't mock it." Calling it the "acme of postmodern nineties filmmaking", he explains, "the postmodern is about surfaces; it is flattened spatiality in which event and character are in a steady state of reminding us that they are pop-cultural figures." According to Kolker:

That's why Pulp Fiction was so popular. Not because all audiences got all or any of its references to Scorsese and Kubrick, but because the narrative and spatial structure of the film never threatened to go beyond themselves into signification. The film's cycle of racist and homophobic jokes might threaten to break out into a quite nasty view of the world, but this nastiness keeps being laughed off – by the mock intensity of the action, the prowling, confronting, perverse, confined, and airless nastiness of the world Tarantino creates.

Henry A. Giroux argues that Tarantino "empties violence of any critical social consequences, offering viewers only the immediacy of shock, humor, and irony-without-insight as elements of mediation. None of these elements gets beyond the seduction of voyeuristic gazing ... [t]he facile consumption of shocking images and hallucinatory delight."Regarding the violence and nihilism in the film, Pamela Demory has suggested that Pulp Fiction should be seen in light of the short stories of Flannery O'Connor, which likewise feature "religious elements, banality, and violence with grotesque humor." Discussing "the connection between violence and redemption," Demory concludes that while O'Connor's purpose is to convince readers "of the powerful force of evil in the world and of our need for grace," Tarantino "seeks to demonstrate that in spite of everything we have seen in the film – all the violence, degradation, death, crime, amoral behavior – grace is still possible; there might still be a God who doesn't judge us on merits."


=== Homage as essence ===


==== Cinema ====
Pulp Fiction is full of homages to other movies. "Tarantino's characters", writes Gary Groth, "inhabit a world where the entire landscape is composed of Hollywood product. Tarantino is a cinematic kleptomaniac – he literally can't help himself." Two scenes in particular have prompted discussion of the film's highly intertextual style. Many have assumed that the dance sequence at Jack Rabbit Slim's was intended as a reference to Travolta's star-making performance as Tony Manero in the epochal Saturday Night Fever (1977); Tarantino, however, credits a scene in the Jean-Luc Godard film Bande à part (1964) with the inspiration. According to the filmmaker;

Everybody thinks that I wrote this scene just to have John Travolta dancing. But the scene existed before John Travolta was cast. But once he was cast, it was like, "Great. We get to see John dance. All the better."... My favorite musical sequences have always been in Godard, because they just come out of nowhere. It's so infectious, so friendly. And the fact that it's not a musical, but he's stopping the movie to have a musical sequence, makes it all the more sweet.

Jerome Charyn argues that, beyond "all the better", Travolta's presence is essential to the power of the scene, and of the film:

Travolta's entire career becomes "backstory", the myth of a movie star who has fallen out of favor, but still resides in our memory as the king of disco. We keep waiting for him to shed his paunch, put on a white polyester suit, and enter the 2001 Odyssey club in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, where he will dance for us and never, never stop. Daniel Day-Lewis couldn't have woken such a powerful longing in us. He isn't part of America's own mad cosmology ... Tony Manero [is] an angel sitting on Vince's shoulder ... [Vince and Mia's] actual dance may be closer to the choreography of Anna Karina's shuffle with her two bumbling gangster boyfriends in Bande à part, but even that reference is lost to us, and we're with Tony again ...

Estella Tincknell notes that while the "diner setting seems to be a simulacrum of a 'fifties' restaurant ... the twist contest is a musical sequence which evokes 'the sixties,' while Travolta's dance performance inevitably references 'the seventies' and his appearance in Saturday Night Fever. ... The 'past' thus becomes a more general 'pastness' in which the stylistic signifiers of various decades are loaded in to a single moment." She also argues that in this passage the film "briefly shifts from its habitually ironic discourse to one that references the conventions of the classic film musical and in doing so makes it possible for the film to inhabit an affective space that goes beyond stylistic allusion."The pivotal moment in which Marsellus crosses the street in front of Butch's car and notices him evokes the scene in which Marion Crane's boss sees her under similar circumstances in Psycho (1960). Marsellus and Butch are soon held captive by Maynard and Zed, "two sadistic honkies straight out of Deliverance" (1972), directed by John Boorman. Zed shares a name with Sean Connery's character in Boorman's follow-up, the science-fiction film Zardoz (1974). When Butch decides to rescue Marsellus, in Glyn White's words, "he finds a trove of items with film-hero resonances". Critics have identified these weapons with a range of possible allusions:

Hammer – The Toolbox Murders (1978)
Baseball bat – Walking Tall (1973); The Untouchables (1987)
Chainsaw – The Texas Chain Saw Massacre (1974); Evil Dead II (1987)
Katana (samurai sword) – many, including Seven Samurai (1954); The Yakuza (1975); Shogun Assassin (1980)At the conclusion of the scene, a portentous line of Marsellus's echoes one from the crime drama Charley Varrick (1973), directed by another of Tarantino's heroes, Don Siegel; the name of the character who speaks it there is Maynard.David Bell argues that far from going against the "current of class stereotype", this scene, like Deliverance, "mobilize[s] a certain construction of poor white country folk – and particularly their sexualization ... 'rustic sexual expression often takes the form of homosexual rape' in American movies." Stephen Paul Miller believes the Pulp Fiction scene goes down much easier than the one it echoes: "The buggery perpetrated is not at all as shocking as it was in Deliverance ... The nineties film reduces seventies competition, horror, and taboo into an entertainingly subtle adrenaline play – a fiction, a pulp fiction." Giroux reads the rape scene homage similarly: "in the end Tarantino's use of parody is about repetition, transgression, and softening the face of violence by reducing it to the property of film history." In Groth's view, the crucial difference is that "in Deliverance the rape created the film's central moral dilemma whereas in Pulp Fiction it was merely 'the single weirdest day of [Butch's] life.'" ("American Me did it too," Tarantino observed. "There's like three butt-fucking scenes in American Me. That's definitely the one to beat in that particular category!")
Neil Fulwood focuses on Butch's weapon selection, writing, "Here, Tarantino's love of movies is at its most open and nonjudgemental, tipping a nod to the noble and the notorious, as well as sending up his own reputation as an enfant terrible of movie violence. Moreover, the scene makes a sly comment about the readiness of cinema to seize upon whatever is to hand for its moments of mayhem and murder." White asserts that "the katana he finally, and significantly, selects identifies him with ... honourable heroes." Conard argues that the first three items symbolize a nihilism that Butch is rejecting. The traditional Japanese sword, in contrasts, represents a culture with a well-defined moral code and thus connects Butch with a more meaningful approach to life.The biker film Nam's Angels is also shown with Fabienne characterizing it as "A motorcycle movie, I'm not sure the name."


==== Television ====
Robert Miklitsch argues that "Tarantino's telephilia" may be more central to the guiding sensibility of Pulp Fiction than the filmmaker's love for rock 'n' roll and even cinema:

Talking about his generation, one that came of age in the '70s, Tarantino has commented that the "number one thing we all shared wasn't music, that was a Sixties thing. Our culture was television." A random list of the TV programs referenced in Pulp Fiction confirms his observation: Speed Racer, Clutch Cargo, The Brady Bunch, The Partridge Family, The Avengers, The Three Stooges, The Flintstones, I Spy, Green Acres, Kung Fu, Happy Days, and last but not least, Mia's fictional pilot, Fox Force Five.

"The above list, with the possible exception of The Avengers," writes Miklitsch, "suggests that Pulp Fiction has less of an elective affinity with the cinematic avant-gardism of Godard than with mainstream network programming." Jonathan Rosenbaum had brought TV into his analysis of the Tarantino/Godard comparison, acknowledging that the directors were similar in wanting to cram everything they like onscreen: "But the differences between what Godard likes and what Tarantino likes and why are astronomical; it's like comparing a combined museum, library, film archive, record shop, and department store with a jukebox, a video-rental outlet, and an issue of TV Guide."Sharon Willis focuses on the way a television show (Clutch Cargo) marks the beginning of, and plays on through, the scene between young Butch and his father's comrade-in-arms. The Vietnam War veteran is played by Christopher Walken, whose presence in the role evokes his performance as a traumatized G.I. in the Vietnam War movie The Deer Hunter (1978). Willis writes that "when Captain Koons enters the living room, we see Walken in his function as an image retrieved from a repertoire of 1970s television and movie versions of ruined masculinity in search of rehabilitation ... [T]he gray light of the television presiding over the scene seems to inscribe the ghostly paternal gaze." Miklitsch asserts that, for some critics, the film is a "prime example of the pernicious ooze-like influence of mass culture exemplified by their bête noire: TV." Kolker might not disagree, arguing that "Pulp Fiction is a simulacrum of our daily exposure to television; its homophobes, thugs and perverts, sentimental boxers and pimp promoters move through a series of long-take tableaux: we watch, laugh, and remain with nothing to comprehend."


=== Notable motifs ===


==== The mysterious 666 briefcase ====

The combination of the mysterious suitcase lock is 666, the "Number of the Beast". Tarantino has said there is no explanation for its contents – it is simply a MacGuffin, a pure plot device. Originally, the case was to contain diamonds, but this was seen as too mundane. For filming purposes, it contained a hidden orange light bulb that produced an otherworldly glow when the case was opened. In a 2007 video interview with fellow director and friend Robert Rodriguez, Tarantino purportedly "reveals" the secret contents of the briefcase, but the film cuts out and skips the scene in the style employed in Tarantino and Rodriguez's Grindhouse (2007), with an intertitle that reads "Missing Reel". The interview resumes with Rodriguez discussing how radically the "knowledge" of the briefcase's contents alters one's understanding of the movie.Despite Tarantino's statements, many solutions to what one scholar calls this "unexplained postmodern puzzle" have been proposed. A strong similarity has often been observed with Robert Aldrich's 1955 film noir Kiss Me Deadly. That movie, features a glowing briefcase housing an atomic explosive. In their review of Alex Cox's 1984 film Repo Man in The Daily Telegraph, Nick Cowen and Hari Patience suggest that Pulp Fiction may also owe "a debt of inspiration" to the glowing car trunk in that film. In scholar Paul Gormley's view, this connection with Kiss Me Deadly, and a similar one with Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981), makes it possible to read the eerie glow as symbolic of violence itself. The idea that the briefcase contains Marsellus's soul gained popular currency in the mid-1990s. Analyzing the notion, Roger Ebert dismissed it as "nothing more than a widely distributed urban legend given false credibility by the mystique of the Net".


==== Jules' Bible passage ====
Jules ritually recites what he describes as a biblical passage, Ezekiel 25:17, before he executes someone. The passage is heard three times – in the introductory sequence in which Jules and Vincent reclaim Marsellus's briefcase from the doomed Brett; that same recitation a second time, at the beginning of "The Bonnie Situation", which overlaps the end of the earlier sequence; and in the epilogue at the diner. The first version of the passage is as follows:

The path of the righteous man is beset on all sides by the inequities of the selfish and the tyranny of evil men. Blessed is he who in the name of charity and goodwill shepherds the weak through the valley of darkness, for he is truly his brother's keeper and the finder of lost children. And I will strike down upon thee with great vengeance and furious anger those who attempt to poison and destroy My brothers. And you will know My name is the Lord when I lay My vengeance upon thee.
The second version, from the diner scene, is identical except for the final line: "And you will know I am the Lord when I lay my vengeance upon you."

While the final two sentences of Jules's speech are similar to the actual cited passage, the first two are fabricated from various biblical phrases. The text of Ezekiel 25 preceding verse 17 indicates that God's wrath is retribution for the hostility of the Philistines. In the King James Version from which Jules's speech is adapted, Ezekiel 25:17 reads in its entirety:

And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall lay My vengeance upon them.
Tarantino's primary inspiration for the speech was the work of Japanese martial arts star Sonny Chiba. Its text and its identification as Ezekiel 25:17 derive from an almost identical creed that appears at the beginning of the Chiba movie Karate Kiba (The Bodyguard; 1976), where it is both shown as a scrolling text and read by an offscreen narrator.The version seen at the beginning of The Bodyguard (1976) is as follows:

The path of the righteous man and defender is beset on all sides by the inequity of the selfish and the tyranny of evil men. Blessed is he, who in the name of charity and good will, shepherds the weak through the valley of darkness, for he is truly his brother's keeper, and the father of lost children. And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious anger, who poison and destroy my brothers; and they shall know that I am Chiba the Bodyguard when I shall lay my vengeance upon them!
In the 1980s television series Kage no Gundan (Shadow Warriors), Chiba's character would lecture the villain-of-the-week about how the world must be rid of evil before killing him. A killer delivers a similar biblical rant in Modesty Blaise, the hardback but pulp-style novel Vincent is shown with in two scenes.Two critics who have analyzed the role of the speech find different ties between Jules's transformation and the issue of postmodernity. Gormley argues that unlike the film's other major characters – Marsellus aside – Jules is:

linked to a "thing" beyond postmodern simulation ... [T]his is perhaps most marked when he moves on from being a simulation of a Baptist preacher, spouting Ezekiel because it was "just a cool thing to say ..." In his conversion, Jules is shown to be cognizant of a place beyond this simulation, which, in this case, the film constructs as God.

Adele Reinhartz writes that the "depth of Jules's transformation" is indicated by the difference in his two deliveries of the passage: "In the first, he is a majestic and awe-inspiring figure, proclaiming the prophecy with fury and self-righteousness ... In the second ... he appears to be a different sort of man altogether ... [I]n true postmodern fashion, [he] reflects on the meaning of his speech and provides several different ways that it might pertain to his current situation." Similar to Gormley, Conard argues that as Jules reflects on the passage, it dawns on him "that it refers to an objective framework of value and meaning that is absent from his life"; to Conard, this contrasts with the film's prevalent representation of a nihilistic culture. Rosenbaum finds much less in Jules's revelation: "[T]he spiritual awakening at the end of Pulp Fiction, which Jackson performs beautifully, is a piece of jive avowedly inspired by kung-fu movies. It may make you feel good, but it certainly doesn't leave you any wiser."


==== The bathroom ====
Much of Pulp Fiction's action revolves around characters who are either in the bathroom or need to use the toilet. To a lesser extent, Tarantino's other films also feature this narrative element. At Jack Rabbit Slim's, Mia goes to "powder her nose" – literally; she snorts coke in the restroom, surrounded by a bevy of women vainly primping. Butch and Fabienne play an extended scene in their motel bathroom, he in the shower, she brushing her teeth; the next morning, but just a few seconds later in screen time, she is again brushing her teeth. As Jules and Vincent confront Brett and two of his pals, a fourth man is hiding in the bathroom – his actions will lead to Jules' transformative "moment of clarity". After Marvin's absurd death, Vincent and Jules wash up in Jimmie's bathroom, where they get into a contretemps over a bloody hand towel. When the diner hold-up turns into a standoff, "Honey Bunny" whines, "I gotta go pee!"As described by Peter and Will Brooker, "In three significant moments Vincent retires to the bathroom [and] returns to an utterly changed world where death is threatened." The threat increases in magnitude as the narrative progresses chronologically, and is realized in the third instance:

Vincent and Jules's diner breakfast and philosophical conversation is aborted by Vincent's bathroom break; an armed robbery ensues while Vincent is reading on the toilet.
While Vincent is in the bathroom worrying about the possibility of going too far with Marsellus's wife, Mia mistakes his heroin for cocaine, snorts it, and overdoses.
During a stakeout at Butch's apartment, Vincent emerges from the toilet with his book and is killed by Butch.In the Brookers' analysis, "Through Vince ... we see the contemporary world as utterly contingent, transformed, disastrously, in the instant you are not looking." Fraiman finds it particularly significant that Vincent is reading Modesty Blaise in two of these instances. She links this fact with the traditional derisive view of women as "the archetypal consumers of pulp":

Locating popular fiction in the bathroom, Tarantino reinforces its association with shit, already suggested by the dictionary meanings of "pulp" that preface the movie: moist, shapeless matter; also, lurid stories on cheap paper. What we have then is a series of damaging associations – pulp, women, shit – that taint not only male producers of mass-market fiction but also male consumers. Perched on the toilet with his book, Vincent is feminized by sitting instead of standing as well as by his trashy tastes; preoccupied by the anal, he is implicitly infantilized and homosexualized; and the seemingly inevitable result is being pulverized by Butch with a Czech M61 submachine gun. That this fate has to do with Vincent's reading habits is strongly suggested by a slow tilt from the book on the floor directly up to the corpse spilled into the tub.

Willis reads Pulp Fiction in almost precisely the opposite direction, finding "its overarching project as a drive to turn shit into gold. This is one way of describing the project of redeeming and recycling popular culture, especially the popular culture of one's childhood, as is Tarantino's wont as well as his stated aim." Despite that, argues Fraiman, "Pulp Fiction demonstrates ... that even an open pulpophile like Tarantino may continue to feel anxious and emasculated by his preferences."


== Accolades ==

Pulp Fiction won eight major awards from a total of twenty-six nominations, including a Best Original Screenplay win at the 67th Academy Awards. Also, in the balloting by the National Society of Film Critics, Samuel L. Jackson was the runner-up in both the Best Actor and the Best Supporting Actor categories.American Film Institute Lists

AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies – No. 95
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains:Vincent Vega and Jules Winnfield – Nominated Villains
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes:"Bring out the Gimp" – Nominated Quote
"They call it a Royale with Cheese" – Nominated Quote
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Laughs – Nominated
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – No. 94
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – No. 53


== NFT dispute ==
In November 2021, Miramax filed a lawsuit against Tarantino who released seven NFTs based on uncut and unseen scenes of Pulp Fiction and including the original handwritten script "revealing secrets about the film and its creator."  Miramax claimed they own the film rights. However, Tarantino disputed the lawsuit and claimed he had rights to the film script in written form. The matter was later settled with Miramax's lawyers filing a brief statement in court: "The parties have agreed to put this matter behind them and look forward to collaborating with each other on future projects, including possible NFTs."


== See also ==
The Killers (Hemingway short story)
The Killers (1946)
Plump Fiction
Quentin Tarantino filmography


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==


== External links ==

Pulp Fiction essay by Jami Bernard at National Film Registry
Official website 
Pulp Fiction at the American Film Institute Catalog
Pulp Fiction at IMDb
Pulp Fiction at AllMovie
Pulp Fiction at Box Office Mojo
Pulp Fiction at Metacritic 
Pulp Fiction at Rotten Tomatoes
Pulp Fiction bibliography (via UC Berkeley)
Discussion of Pulp Fiction use of Ezekiel 25:17 at Bibledex.com12 Angry Men (1957 film)
12 Years a Slave (film)
1917 (2019 film)
1994 Cannes Film Festival
1st Screen Actors Guild Awards
2001: A Space Odyssey (film)
2014 Cannes Film Festival
2 Days in the Valley
300 (film)
4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days
52nd Golden Globe Awards
67th Academy Awards
A-list
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Laughs
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Band Apart
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Few Good Men
A Flock of Seagulls
A Heart in Winter
A Man and a Woman
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Most Violent Year
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Separation
A Star Is Born (2018 film)
About Schmidt
Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Awards
Adele Reinhartz
After Hours (film)
Air Force (film)
Alain Resnais
Alain Robbe-Grillet
Aldo Ray
Alex Cox
Alexis Arquette
Alfre Woodard
Alfred Hitchcock
All-American Girl (TV series)
AllMovie
All About My Mother
All That Jazz (film)
All the President's Men (film)
Almost Famous
Alpha wave
Amadeus (film)
Amanda Plummer
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Film Institute
American Me
American Splendor (film)
Amour (2012 film)
Anatomy of a Fall
Andrzej Sekuła
Angela Jones
Anna Karina
Annie Hall
Anthology film
Antoine and Antoinette
Apocalypse Now
Arithmetic mean
Arnold Schwarzenegger
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Artforum
Arthur Penn
At the Movies (1986 TV program)
Atlantic City (1980 film)
Au revoir les enfants
Avengers: Endgame
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role
BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay
BBC
BBC News
Babe (film)
Babel (film)
Backstory
Bande à part (film)
Banksy
Barry Lyndon
Barton Fink
Batman & Robin (film)
Be Cool
Beauty and the Beast (2017 film)
Becket (1964 film)
Being John Malkovich
Belfast (film)
Belgian Film Critics Association
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Beowulf (2007 film)
Betrayal (1983 film)
Betsy Faith Heimann
Bicycle Thieves
Big Kahuna Burger
Billboard 200
Birdman (film)
Black Mask (magazine)
Black Orpheus
Black Panther (film)
Black Sabbath (film)
Black Swan (film)
Black comedy
Blake Edwards
Blaxploitation
Blowup
Blue Is the Warmest Colour
Blue Ribbon Award for Best Foreign Film
Blue Velvet (film)
Bob Dole
Bob Weinstein
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Bondage suit
Bong
Bonnie and Clyde (film)
Book of Ezekiel
Boris Johnson
Boston Society of Film Critics
Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Film
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Brazil (1985 film)
Breaking Away
Breaking the Waves
Breathless (1960 film)
Brexit negotiations in 2019
Bridge of Spies (film)
Brief Encounter
British Academy Film Awards
British Board of Film Classification
Broadcast syndication
Brokeback Mountain
Bronagh Gallagher
Bruce Willis
Buddy Holly
Bugsy
Bull Durham
Burr Steers
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
CBS Interactive
CNN
Cabaret (1972 film)
Call Me by Your Name (film)
Cameo appearance
Camp (style)
Capote (film)
Captain America: The Winter Soldier
Casino Royale (2006 film)
Channel 4
Chariots of Fire
Charley Varrick
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Film Critics Association
Chicago Reader
Chicago Tribune
Christian Slater
Christopher Walken
Chronicle of the Years of Fire
CinemaScore
Cinema Speculation
Cinematographer
Citizen Kane
Claire's Knee
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Clutch Cargo
Cocaine
Coming Home (1978 film)
Con Air
Confessions of a Nazi Spy
Conversation Piece (film)
Cornell Woolrich
Costume designer
Crash (2004 film)
Crime film
Crimes and Misdemeanors
Crossfire (film)
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon
Culver City, California
Curdled (film)
Cyrano de Bergerac (1990 film)
Cyrano de Bergerac (play)
Da 5 Bloods
Daily Variety
Dallas–Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Dancer in the Dark
Dances with Wolves
Daniel Day-Lewis
David Ansen
David Denby
David Desser
David and Sandy Reynolds-Wasco
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Film
Day for Night (film)
Days of Heaven
De Wallen
Dead Poets Society
Dean Martin
Death Proof
Deliverance
Destiny Turns on the Radio
Dheepan
Dick Dale
Die Hard
Disney
District 9
Django Unchained
Do the Right Thing
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dog Day Afternoon
Dominic Cummings
Don Siegel
Double cross (betrayal)
Dr. Strangelove
Dreamgirls (film)
Drive My Car (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
Drug overdose
Drugstore Cowboy
Duane Whitaker
Dumbo
Dunkirk (2017 film)
Dusty Springfield
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
East of Eden (film)
Ed Sullivan
Election (1999 film)
Elephant (2003 film)
Ellen DeGeneres
Elmore Leonard
Emil Sitka
Empire (film magazine)
Empire of the Sun (film)
Enfant terrible
English language
Ennio Morricone
Entertainment Weekly
Epigram
Eric Stoltz
Eternity and a Day
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Evil Dead II
Fahrenheit 9/11
Fandango Media
Fanny and Alexander
Fanzine
Far from Heaven
Far from the Madding Crowd (1967 film)
Farewell My Concubine (film)
Fargo (1996 film)
Fast & Furious 6
Field of Dreams
Film editing
Film grain
Film noir
Film score
Film speed
Filmophile
Finding Neverland (film)
Fixer (person)
Flags of Our Fathers (film)
Flannery O'Connor
Flashdance
Fonzie
Forbidden Games
Forrest Gump
Foster Hirsch
Four Rooms
Frank Tashlin
Frank Whaley
Fredric Brown
French New Wave
Friendly Persuasion (1956 film)
From Dusk till Dawn
From Paris with Love (film)
Furious 7
Gaby Rodgers
Gandhi (film)
Gangster film
Gary Groth
Gary Oldman
Gate of Hell (film)
Gene Siskel
General Mills
Geoffrey O'Brien
Gerald Peary
Gervaise (film)
Get Out
Get Out Your Handkerchiefs
Gigi (1958 film)
Girl, You'll Be a Woman Soon
Gladiator (2000 film)
Glitterati (film)
Gods and Monsters (film)
Good Night, and Good Luck
Goodbye to Language
Goodfellas
Googie architecture
Google Books
Gothic fiction
Gran Torino
Grand Prix (Belgian Film Critics Association)
Grave Danger
Gravity (2013 film)
Green-light
Green Acres
Green Book (film)
Grindhouse (film)
Guess Who's Coming to Dinner
Hannah and Her Sisters
Happy Days
Hardboiled
Harvey Keitel
Harvey Weinstein
Hawthorne, California
Henry Giroux
Henry V (1944 film)
Her (film)
Hereafter (film)
Heroin
Hidden Figures
Hillbilly
Holly Hunter
Homage (arts)
Honour
Hope and Glory (film)
Howard Hawks
Howards End (film)
Hudson Hawk
Hugo (film)
I, Daniel Blake
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
I Spy (1965 TV series)
If....
If Beale Street Could Talk (film)
In Which We Serve
In the Bedroom
In the Name of the Father (film)
Independent Spirit Award for Best Director
Independent Spirit Award for Best Film
Independent Spirit Award for Best Male Lead
Independent Spirit Award for Best Screenplay
Independent Spirit Awards
Independent film
Infernal Affairs
Inglourious Basterds
Inside Llewyn Davis
Intertextuality
Intertitle
Irony
It Happened One Night
JFK (film)
Jackie Brown
Jacques Tourneur
James Wood (critic)
Jami Bernard
Janet Maslin
Jean-Luc Godard
Jean-Pierre Melville
Jerome Charyn
Jersey Boys (film)
Jersey Films
Jesus Christ Superstar (film)
Jheri curl
John Boorman
John Garfield
John Simon (critic)
John Travolta
Johnny Depp
Joint Security Area (film)
Joker (2019 film)
Jonathan Rosenbaum
Joseph Pilato
Judgment at Nuremberg
Julia Sweeney
Julius Caesar (1953 film)
Juno (film)
Jurassic Park (film)
Kagemusha
Karate Kiba
Karen Maruyama
Katana
Kathy Griffin
Kenneth Turan
Kenneth Womack
Kevin Costner
Kill Bill: Volume 1
Kill Bill: Volume 2
Killers of the Flower Moon (film)
Killing Zoe
King James Version
Kiss Me Deadly
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kung Fu (TV series)
L'Enfant (film)
L.A. Confidential (film)
La Dolce Vita
La La Land
La Strada
Lady Bird (film)
Last Action Hero
Laurence Fishburne
Lawrence Bender
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Le Soir
Leaving Las Vegas
Lenny (film)
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Letters from Iwo Jima
Library of Congress
Licorice Pizza
Life Is Beautiful
Life Is Sweet (film)
Lilies of the Field (1963 film)
Lincoln (film)
List of 1994 box office number-one films in the United States
List of accolades received by Django Unchained
List of accolades received by Inglourious Basterds
List of accolades received by Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
List of accolades received by Pulp Fiction
List of accolades received by The Hateful Eight
List of awards and nominations received by Quentin Tarantino
List of biker films
List of films considered the best
Little Dorrit (1987 film)
Little Miss Sunshine
Little Women (2019 film)
Los Angeles
Los Angeles Film Critics Association
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Los Angeles Times
Lost in Translation (film)
Lucky Day (film)
M*A*S*H (film)
MAC-10
MTV Movie Award for Movie of the Year
MacGuffin
Macbeth (1971 film)
Mad Max: Fury Road
Magnum opus
Mamie Van Doren
Man of Iron
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Manohla Dargis
Marathon Man (film)
Maria de Medeiros
Marilyn Monroe
Mario Bava
Martial arts film
Martin Scorsese
Marty (film)
Mary Poppins (film)
María Candelaria
Masculinity
Match fixing
Max Julien
Mean Streets
Meg Ryan
Meg Tilly
Melancholia (2011 film)
Melvin and Howard
Memento (film)
Men Without Wings
Menace II Society
Mephisto (1981 film)
Metacritic
Mia Wallace
Michael Gilden
Michael Madsen
Mike Hammer (character)
Mike Medavoy
Million Dollar Baby
Miracle in Milan
Miramax
Miramax Films
Misirlou
Miss Julie (1951 film)
Missing (1982 film)
Mission: Impossible (film)
Mission: Impossible – Fallout
Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol
Mississippi Burning
Modesty Blaise (novel)
Monsieur Verdoux
Monster cereals
Moonlight (2016 film)
Morality
Motherhood (ER)
Moulin Rouge!
MovieMaker
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mr. Stitch
Mulan (2020 film)
Mulholland Drive (film)
Musical film
My Best Friend's Birthday
My Fair Lady (film)
My Sharona
Mystic River (film)
Möbius strip
N.W.A
Nam's Angels
Napoleon Dynamite
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review
National Board of Review Award for Best Film
National Film Registry
National Film and Television School
National Review
National Society of Film Critics
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actor
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Film
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actor
Natural Born Killers
Neecha Nagar
Neil Diamond
Nelly and Mr. Arnaud
Network (1976 film)
Never Again (The X-Files)
New Beverly Cinema
New York (magazine)
New York Film Critics Circle
New York Film Festival
New York Magazine
New York Post
Newsweek
Nicholas Christopher
Nick Fury
Nigger
Night Must Fall (1937 film)
Nightfall (1956 film)
Nightfall (1957 film)
Nihilism
No Country for Old Men
No Time to Die
Nocturnal Animals
Nomadland
Non-fungible token
None but the Lonely Heart (film)
Nonlinear narrative
Norwegian International Film Festival
Number of the beast
O Pagador de Promessas
On the Beach (1959 film)
On the Waterfront
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (novel)
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Ordinary People
Othello (1951 film)
Out of Africa (film)
Out of Sight
Owen Gleiberman
Padre Padrone
Paisan
Palme d'Or
Pam Grier
Pan's Labyrinth
Parasite (2019 film)
Paris, Texas (film)
Pastiche
Pastoral Symphony (film)
Patton (film)
Paul Calderón
Pawnbroker
Pelle the Conqueror
Persona (1966 film)
Peter Bart
Peter Biskind
Peter Greene
Peter Travers
Phantom Thread
Phil LaMarr
Philistines
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
Pixote
Planet Terror
Platoon (film)
Plot device
Plump Fiction
Point of No Return (1993 film)
Political correctness
Pop music
Popular culture
Postmodernism
Postmodernist film
Postmodernity
Power pop
Pre-production
Precious (film)
Premiere (magazine)
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
Principal photography
Production designer
Psycho (1960 film)
Pulp Fiction (soundtrack)
Pulp fiction (disambiguation)
Pulp magazine
QT8: The First Eight
Quentin Tarantino
Quentin Tarantino's unrealized projects
Quentin Tarantino Film Festival
Quentin Tarantino filmography
Question 7
Quills (film)
Raging Bull
Raiders of the Lost Ark
Rain Man
Raise the Red Lantern
Ralph Meeker
Rambling Rose (film)
Ran (film)
Reds (film)
Repo Man (film)
Reservoir Dogs
Return to Seoul
Review aggregator
Richard Corliss
Ridicule (film)
River's Edge
Road to Perdition
Robert Aldrich
Robert P. Kolker
Robert Rodriguez
Rock and roll
Rocky
Roger Avary
Roger Corman
Roger Ebert
Rogue One
Rolling Stone
Rolling Thunder Pictures
Roma (2018 film)
Rome, Open City
Rosanna Arquette
Rosetta (film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Ryan's Daughter
Sally Menke
Salt (2010 film)
Samuel L. Jackson
San Sebastián International Film Festival
Saturday Night Fever
Saturn Award for Best Action or Adventure Film
Saving Private Ryan
Scarecrow (1973 film)
Scenes from a Marriage
Schindler's List
Scream (1996 film)
Scream VI
Screen International
Sean Connery
Secrets & Lies (film)
Self-reference
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Sergio Leone
Seven (1995 film)
Seven Samurai
Sex, Lies, and Videotape
Shadow Warriors (TV series)
Shame (1968 film)
Shaolin Soccer
Sharon Waxman
Shine (film)
Shogun Assassin
Shoplifters (film)
ShortList
Short Cuts
Short film
Sid Haig
Sideways
Sight and Sound
Silent Hill (film)
Silver Linings Playbook
Sin City (film)
Skyfall
Slumdog Millionaire
Small Axe (anthology)
Society of Texas Film Critics
Son of a Preacher Man
Sonny Chiba
Sons and Lovers (film)
Sony Pictures
Soul music
Spaghetti Western
Special advisers (UK government)
Speed Racer
Spider-Man: No Way Home
Spotlight (film)
Stand and Deliver
Stanley Kauffmann
Stanley Kubrick
Star Wars
Star Wars: The Force Awakens
Star Wars (film)
Steve Buscemi
Stranger Than Paradise
Sundance Institute
Sundays and Cybele
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Surf music
Sylvester Stallone
TV Guide
Taormina Film Fest
Taste of Cherry
Taxi Driver
Technicolor
Terminator 2: Judgment Day
Terms of Endearment
The A.V. Club
The Agony and the Ecstasy (film)
The Apostle
The Artist (film)
The Avengers (2012 film)
The Avengers (TV series)
The Ballad of Narayama (1983 film)
The Barbarian Invasions
The Best Intentions
The Birds, the Bees and the Italians
The Brady Bunch
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Bridges of Madison County (film)
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Class (2008 film)
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Conversation
The Cranes Are Flying
The Daily Beast
The Damned (1947 film)
The Dark Knight
The Dead (1987 film)
The Deer Hunter
The Departed
The Descendants
The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie
The Eel (film)
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story
The Elephant Man (film)
The Fabelmans
The Farewell (2019 film)
The Fault in Our Stars (film)
The Flintstones
The French Connection (film)
The Full Monty
The Go-Between (1971 film)
The Godfather
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great Movies
The Greatest Showman
The Green Mile (film)
The Grifters (film)
The Guardian
The Hateful Eight
The Hireling
The Holdovers
The Hours (film)
The Hunger Games: Catching Fire
The Hurt Locker
The Independent
The Informer (1935 film)
The Insider (film)
The Irishman
The Kansas City Star
The Killers (1946 film)
The Killers (Hemingway short story)
The Killing (film)
The Killing Fields (film)
The Knack
The Knack ...and How to Get It
The Last Chance (1945 film)
The Leopard (1963 film)
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Long Absence
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
The Lost Daughter (film)
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Man Who Wasn't There (2001 film)
The Matrix
The Mattei Affair
The Mission (1986 film)
The New Republic
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Night of the Shooting Stars
The Nun's Story (film)
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Onion
The Ox-Bow Incident
The Partridge Family
The Philadelphia Inquirer
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Piano
The Player (1992 film)
The Post (film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Prince and the Showgirl
The Prisoner of Zenda
The Quiet Man
The Red Meadows
The Rider (film)
The Right Stuff (film)
The Ringer (website)
The Rules of Attraction (film)
The Shape of Water
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Silent World
The Social Network
The Son's Room
The Specialist
The Square (2017 film)
The Sting
The Taste of Others
The Texas Chain Saw Massacre
The Third Man
The Three Stooges
The Tin Drum (film)
The Toolbox Murders
The Towering Inferno
The Tree of Life (film)
The Tree of Wooden Clogs
The True Glory
The Turning Point (1945 film)
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1
The Twilight Saga: Eclipse
The Twilight Saga: New Moon
The Umbrellas of Cherbourg
The Unbearable Lightness of Being (film)
The Untouchables (film)
The Usual Suspects
The Wages of Fear
The Washington Post
The White Ribbon
The Wind That Shakes the Barley (film)
The Wishing Tree (1976 film)
The Working Class Goes to Heaven
The Wrestler (2008 film)
The Yakuza
The Zone of Interest (film)
There's Something About Mary
There Will Be Blood
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead
Three Kings (1999 film)
Tim Roth
Time's All-Time 100 Movies
Time (magazine)
Time Inc. UK
Titane
Titanic (1997 film)
To All the Boys: Always and Forever
Todd McCarthy
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tony Tarantino
Tootsie
Top Gun: Maverick
Topaze (1933 American film)
Topsy-Turvy
Torment (1944 film)
Toronto Star
Total Film
Traffic (2000 film)
Train of Life
Trainspotting (film)
Transformers (film)
TriStar Pictures
Triangle of Sadness
Trophy wife
True Romance
Turnaround (filmmaking)
Twilight (2008 film)
Twist (dance)
Two Cents Worth of Hope
Two Women
Tár
Uma Thurman
Unbroken (film)
Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives
Uncut (magazine)
Under the Sun of Satan (film)
Underground (1995 film)
Unforgiven
Union Pacific (film)
United 93 (film)
United States Air Force
University Press of Mississippi
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Urge Overkill
Vanity Fair (magazine)
Variety (magazine)
Video Archives
Viet Cong
Vietnam War
Ving Rhames
Viridiana
Vista Theatre (Los Angeles)
Vulture (website)
WALL-E
Walking Tall (1973 film)
Waltz with Bashir
Warner Bros.
Wedding Crashers
When Father Was Away on Business
Wild at Heart (film)
Wings of Desire
Winter Sleep (film)
Witness (1985 film)
Writers Guild of America, West
Wyatt Earp (film)
Yi Yi
Yol
Z (1969 film)
Zardoz
Zero Dark Thirty
Ziegfeld Follies (film)
Škorpion
http://www.tiscali.co.uk/entertainment/film/biographies/uma_thurman_biog/6
http://www.hollywood.com/news/Cobain_Turned_Down_Pulp_Fiction_Role/3555873
http://www.festival-cannes.com/index.php/en/archives/awards/1994
http://www.moviemaker.com/articles/item/10_years_of_moviemaker_10_years_of_indie_film_2952/
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,981560-1,00.html
http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1282/is_n22_v46/ai_15999907/pg_1
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,983035-1,00.html
http://www.thefreelibrary.com/DOLE+TAKES+ON+DRUG+ISSUE+:+CLINTON+FAULTED+FOR+%60NAKED'+LACK+OF...-a083968058
http://www.totalfilm.com/features/specials/pulp_fiction
http://www.time.com/time/2005/100movies/0,23220,pulp_fiction,00.html
http://tls.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,25348-2597639,00.html
http://www.close-upfilm.com/features/Featuresarchive/sellingamovie.html
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/6575345.stm
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/3362603.stm
http://www.afi.com/10top10/gangster.html
http://www.totalfilm.com/features/total_film_presents_the_top_100_movies_of_all_time
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/1676023.stm
http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1252/is_n20_v121/ai_15879432/pg_1
http://www.snopes.com/movies/films/pulp.htm
http://creative.myspace.com/groups/_mh/aoa/pages/qtarantino_rrodriguez/qtarantino_rrodriguez.html
http://www.straightdope.com/mailbag/mpulpfiction.html
http://www.bartleby.com/108/26/25.html
http://www.impossiblefunky.com/archives/issue_2/2_toilet.asp?IshNum=2&Headline=Tarantino%20In%20The%20Can
http://www.hfpa.org/browse/film/24792
http://archive.sensesofcinema.com/contents/00/3/circular.html#b2
http://archive.southcoasttoday.com/daily/07-96/07-12-96/c04ae104.htm
http://www.tiscali.co.uk/entertainment/film/biographies/john_travolta_biog/4
http://www.film.com/movies/story/michael-madsen-talks-hell-ride/22258175
http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/MRC/tarantino.html#pulp
http://www.tim-roth.com/index.php?id=ukpremieredec95
http://articles.philly.com/2010-02-05/entertainment/24955905_1_charlie-wax-secret-agent-man-pierre-morel
http://www.sagawards.org/1_award_nom
http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/ampas_awards/DisplayMain.jsp;jsessionid=F5E20EAF29DB9C3219EAAC6FE3B868C9.jicama?curTime=1167423497977
http://www.bafta.org/site/webdav/site/myjahiasite/shared/import/Film_Winners_1990-1999.pdf
http://archives.lesoir.be/loulou-gaste_t-19950109-Z08Z7R.html
http://www.miramax.com/movie/pulp-fiction
http://www.shortlist.com/entertainment/films/50-things-you-(probably)-didnt-know-about-pulp-fiction
http://www.bibledex.com/verses/pulp_fiction.html
http://www.wga.org/subpage_newsevents.aspx?id=1807
https://web.archive.org/web/20061231115331/http://www.sensesofcinema.com/contents/00/3/circular.html#b2
https://web.archive.org/web/20071013220900/http://www.festival-cannes.com/index.php/en/archives/awards/1994
https://web.archive.org/web/20070202074453/http://www.bafta.org/site/webdav/site/myjahiasite/shared/import/Film_Winners_1990-1999.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20061126215319/http://www.sensesofcinema.com/contents/00/3/circular.html#b2
https://web.archive.org/web/20080621204015/http://www.rollingstone.com/artists/funlovincriminals/albums/album/107552/review/5944992/come_find_yourself
http://film.guardian.co.uk/interview/interviewpages/0,6737,1194170,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20081023235552/http://www.film.com/movies/story/michael-madsen-talks-hell-ride/22258175
https://web.archive.org/web/20081015185836/http://www.sagawards.org/1_award_nom
https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2006/mar/26/1
http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/10/19/the-secrets-of-pulp-fiction-20-things-you-didn-t-know-about-the-movie-on-its-20th-anniversary.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130306065813/http://www.wga.org/subpage_newsevents.aspx?id=1807
https://web.archive.org/web/20070507080424/http://www.tiscali.co.uk/entertainment/film/biographies/uma_thurman_biog/6
https://web.archive.org/web/20110716071157/http://connect.afi.com/site/PageServer?pagename=micro_100landing
https://web.archive.org/web/20071012013656/http://variety.com/profiles/Film/main/30051/Pulp+Fiction.html?dataSet=1&query=%22pulp%2Bfiction%22%2B1994
https://web.archive.org/web/20071130072735/http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1282/is_n22_v46/ai_15999907/pg_1
https://web.archive.org/web/20071130072640/http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1252/is_n20_v121/ai_15879432/pg_1
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/videos/pulpfictionrkempley_a01ac7.htm
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/news/get-the-gimp-breaking-down-pulp-fictions-most-notorious-scene-20140521
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/reviews/pulp-fiction-19941014
https://www.rollingstone.com/artists/funlovincriminals/albums/album/107552/review/5944992/come_find_yourself
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v131235
https://www.allmusic.com/album/r204558
https://web.archive.org/web/20070104050530/http://www.tiscali.co.uk/entertainment/film/biographies/john_travolta_biog/4
https://web.archive.org/web/20071122005136/http://www.moviemaker.com/articles/item/10_years_of_moviemaker_10_years_of_indie_film_2952/
https://web.archive.org/web/20071011212644/http://www.close-upfilm.com/features/Featuresarchive/sellingamovie.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20120211214336/http://www.impossiblefunky.com/archives/issue_2/2_toilet.asp?IshNum=2&Headline=Tarantino%20In%20The%20Can
https://nypost.com/2014/10/18/inside-the-grisly-scene-that-made-pulp-fiction/
https://variety.com/1994/film/reviews/pulp-fiction-1200437049/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/movies/library-of-congress-announces-2013-national-film-registry-selections/2013/12/17/eba98bce-6737-11e3-ae56-22de072140a2_story.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1994/09/22/movies/a-film-maker-and-the-art-of-the-deal.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1994/09/23/movies/film-festival-review-pulp-fiction-quentin-tarantino-s-wild-ride-life-s-dangerous.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1995/06/04/us/reviews-by-weekend-moviegoers-are-in-dole-gets-a-thumbs-down.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/01/tv/movies-critic-s-choice.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1995/01/04/movies/pulp-fiction-gets-top-prize-from-national-film-critics.html
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0110912/
https://web.archive.org/web/20131029194626/http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/ampas_awards/DisplayMain.jsp
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/motoring/wheelsonfilm/2753942/Wheels-On-Film-Repo-Man.html
https://newrepublic.com/article/61392/shooting
http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1994-11-06/entertainment/9411060361_1_n-word-hipness-true-romance
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/local/1994/10/25/lets-lose-the-gory-gulp-fiction/dbe0b009-b042-46ad-b245-cc5ad0f4be01/
https://viaf.org/viaf/316752351
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4392032-9
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/55207
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=pulpfiction.htm
http://www.cnn.com/2014/09/23/showbiz/movies/pulp-fiction-20th-anniversary/index.html
https://www.metacritic.com/browse/movies/score/metascore/all/filtered
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/pulp_fiction
https://www.cinemascore.com/
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/pulp-fiction
https://web.archive.org/web/20070621100941/http://bostonreview.net/BR20.2/stone.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20131105123711/http://www.shortlist.com/entertainment/films/50-things-you-(probably)-didnt-know-about-pulp-fiction
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104123#P856
https://www.indy100.com/article/dominic-cummings-pulp-fiction-cool-like-fonzies-boris-johnson-brexit-9095526
https://authority.bibsys.no/authority/rest/authorities/html/90863471
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14412038s
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14412038s
https://www.idref.fr/178454613
https://web.archive.org/web/20150510235257/http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/pulp-fiction-film-0
https://web.archive.org/web/20110430222745/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=pulpfiction.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20170709034854/http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/videos/pulpfictionrkempley_a01ac7.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20120112023743/http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/1995/09/15/DD26653.DTL
https://web.archive.org/web/20131218140500/http://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/movies/library-of-congress-announces-2013-national-film-registry-selections/2013/12/17/eba98bce-6737-11e3-ae56-22de072140a2_story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080709093114/http://film.guardian.co.uk/interview/interviewpages/0,6737,1194170,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20071015004935/http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,304048,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130120090146/http://www.tim-roth.com/index.php?id=ukpremieredec95
https://web.archive.org/web/20120413180958/http://www.allmovie.com/artist/ving-rhames-p59836
https://web.archive.org/web/20071002130523/http://www.avclub.com/content/node/22535
https://web.archive.org/web/20180729150353/http://www.cnn.com/2014/09/23/showbiz/movies/pulp-fiction-20th-anniversary/index.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20171114030842/http://nypost.com/2014/10/18/inside-the-grisly-scene-that-made-pulp-fiction/
https://web.archive.org/web/20170316113201/http://www.avclub.com/article/phil-lamarr-on-ifuturamai-and-getting-shot-in-the--81774
https://web.archive.org/web/20170103174249/http://www.avclub.com/article/frank-whaley-acting-directing-and-getting-yelled-s-215751
https://web.archive.org/web/20170426201242/http://www.cinemablend.com/new/Pulp-Fiction-Scene-Burr-Steers-Kept-Screwing-Up-Why-108537.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170315174845/http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/10/19/the-secrets-of-pulp-fiction-20-things-you-didn-t-know-about-the-movie-on-its-20th-anniversary.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170917193424/http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/news/get-the-gimp-breaking-down-pulp-fictions-most-notorious-scene-20140521
https://web.archive.org/web/20091008125832/http://archive.southcoasttoday.com/daily/07-96/07-12-96/c04ae104.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20080630001906/http://www.variety.com/article/VR103729.html?categoryid=13&cs=1&query=%22pulp+fiction%22+1994+tarantino
https://web.archive.org/web/20170709114430/http://www.nytimes.com/1994/09/22/movies/a-film-maker-and-the-art-of-the-deal.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180515224056/https://www.nytimes.com/1994/09/23/movies/film-festival-review-pulp-fiction-quentin-tarantino-s-wild-ride-life-s-dangerous.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20171228172344/https://variety.com/1994/film/reviews/pulp-fiction-1200437049/
https://web.archive.org/web/20110717164659/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?yr=1994&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20180102130540/https://www.cinemascore.com/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130216033721/http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19941014/REVIEWS/410140304/1023
https://web.archive.org/web/20090402010106/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,981560-1,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110415121356/http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/reviews/pulp-fiction-19941014
https://web.archive.org/web/20180505050442/http://articles.latimes.com/1994-10-14/entertainment/ca-50020_1_pulp-fiction
https://web.archive.org/web/20180411025845/https://newrepublic.com/article/61392/shooting
https://web.archive.org/web/20180615032351/https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/local/1994/10/25/lets-lose-the-gory-gulp-fiction/dbe0b009-b042-46ad-b245-cc5ad0f4be01/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180411025837/http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1994-11-06/entertainment/9411060361_1_n-word-hipness-true-romance
https://web.archive.org/web/20110430111123/http://articles.latimes.com/1995-03-27/entertainment/ca-47721_1_independent-spirit-awards
https://web.archive.org/web/20130120104851/http://archives.lesoir.be/loulou-gaste_t-19950109-Z08Z7R.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180602064611/https://www.nytimes.com/1995/06/04/us/reviews-by-weekend-moviegoers-are-in-dole-gets-a-thumbs-down.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080422075503/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,983035-1,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080719202147/http://www.thefreelibrary.com/DOLE+TAKES+ON+DRUG+ISSUE+:+CLINTON+FAULTED+FOR+%60NAKED'+LACK+OF...-a083968058
https://web.archive.org/web/20090404093026/http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2007/03/05/070305crat_atlarge_denby
https://web.archive.org/web/20090402142636/http://www.variety.com/index.asp?layout=features2006&content=jump&jump=story&dept=cannes&nav=FCannes&articleid=VR1117942945
https://web.archive.org/web/20081012072032/http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117794890.html?categoryid=1037&cs=1&query=%22pulp+fiction%22+1994+tarantino
https://web.archive.org/web/20071009170856/http://www.totalfilm.com/features/specials/pulp_fiction
https://web.archive.org/web/20130213235156/http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20010610/REVIEWS08/106100301/1023
https://web.archive.org/web/20070603155000/http://www.time.com/time/2005/100movies/0,23220,pulp_fiction,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080828181342/http://www.ew.com/ew/gallery/0,,20207076_20207079_20207442_24,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20071121220459/http://tls.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,25348-2597639,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180602064545/https://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/01/tv/movies-critic-s-choice.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20160314104706/http://articles.philly.com/2010-02-05/entertainment/24955905_1_charlie-wax-secret-agent-man-pierre-morel
https://web.archive.org/web/20100106021340/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/6575345.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20090708135503/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/3362603.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20190909064808/https://www.indy100.com/article/dominic-cummings-pulp-fiction-cool-like-fonzies-boris-johnson-brexit-9095526
https://web.archive.org/web/20130116145351/http://www.afi.com/10top10/gangster.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20190102032945/https://www.metacritic.com/browse/movies/score/metascore/all/filtered
https://web.archive.org/web/20131101010231/http://www.empireonline.com/500/94.asp
https://web.archive.org/web/20080924181919/http://www.totalfilm.com/features/total_film_presents_the_top_100_movies_of_all_time
https://web.archive.org/web/20090302155719/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/1676023.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20160817181404/https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2006/mar/26/1
https://web.archive.org/web/20130120090140/http://creative.myspace.com/groups/_mh/aoa/pages/qtarantino_rrodriguez/qtarantino_rrodriguez.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20081120192104/http://www.straightdope.com/mailbag/mpulpfiction.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180813111607/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/motoring/wheelsonfilm/2753942/Wheels-On-Film-Repo-Man.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20100131052531/http://www.bartleby.com/108/26/25.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20070807063318/http://www1.hfpa.org/browse/film/24792
https://web.archive.org/web/20170709114845/http://www.nytimes.com/1995/01/04/movies/pulp-fiction-gets-top-prize-from-national-film-critics.html
https://www.vulture.com/article/best-oscar-best-picture-losers.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200306121315/https://www.vulture.com/article/best-oscar-best-picture-losers.html
https://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=pulpfiction.htm
https://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,304048,00.html
https://www.allmovie.com/artist/ving-rhames-p59836
https://www.avclub.com/article/phil-lamarr-on-ifuturamai-and-getting-shot-in-the--81774
https://www.avclub.com/article/frank-whaley-acting-directing-and-getting-yelled-s-215751
https://www.cinemablend.com/new/Pulp-Fiction-Scene-Burr-Steers-Kept-Screwing-Up-Why-108537.html
https://www.variety.com/profiles/Film/main/30051/Pulp+Fiction.html?dataSet=1&query=%22pulp+fiction%22+1994
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?yr=1994&p=.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/pulp_fiction/
https://articles.latimes.com/1994-10-14/entertainment/ca-50020_1_pulp-fiction
https://articles.latimes.com/1995-03-27/entertainment/ca-47721_1_independent-spirit-awards
https://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2007/03/05/070305crat_atlarge_denby
https://www.variety.com/index.asp?layout=features2006&content=jump&jump=story&dept=cannes&nav=FCannes&articleid=VR1117942945
https://www.variety.com/article/VR1117794890.html?categoryid=1037&cs=1&query=%22pulp+fiction%22+1994+tarantino
https://www.empireonline.com/500/94.asp
https://bostonreview.net/BR20.2/stone.html
https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://www.loc.gov/item/prn-13-216/2013-national-film-registry/2013-12-18/
https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2013/03/making-of-pulp-fiction-oral-history/amp
https://web.archive.org/web/20081120065456/http://www.a3upodcast.com/node/187
http://www.a3upodcast.com/node/187
https://www.theringer.com/video/2020/1/16/21068675/laurence-fishburne-turned-down-samuel-l-jackson-role-in-pulp-fiction
https://www.vulture.com/article/laurence-fishburne-in-conversation.html
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104123#identifiers
https://web.archive.org/web/20200820185534/https://www.theringer.com/video/2020/1/16/21068675/laurence-fishburne-turned-down-samuel-l-jackson-role-in-pulp-fiction
https://books.google.com/books?id=DBOCBgAAQBAJ&q=pulp%2520fiction%2520%2522the%2520winston%2522%2520tarantino%2520amsterdam&pg=PT168
https://web.archive.org/web/20161031213743/https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200604221938/https://www.loc.gov/item/prn-13-216/2013-national-film-registry/2013-12-18/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200821082213/https://www.vulture.com/article/laurence-fishburne-in-conversation.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20190115053439/https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2013/03/making-of-pulp-fiction-oral-history/amp
https://web.archive.org/web/20201113181753/https://books.google.com/books?id=DBOCBgAAQBAJ&q=pulp%2520fiction%2520%2522the%2520winston%2522%2520tarantino%2520amsterdam&pg=PT168
https://www.reddit.com/r/MovieDetails/comments/6lv6qj/kathy_griffin_was_playing_herself_in_pulp_fiction/
https://www.filmsite.org/pulp4.htmls
https://web.archive.org/web/20210629195239/https://www.reddit.com/r/MovieDetails/comments/6lv6qj/kathy_griffin_was_playing_herself_in_pulp_fiction/
https://archive.today/20120604135659/http://www.hollywood.com/news/Cobain_Turned_Down_Pulp_Fiction_Role/3555873
https://archive.today/20180518145158/https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/whats-in-the-briefcase/
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/17/business/miramax-tarantino-nft-pulp-fiction.html
https://news.yahoo.com/quentin-tarantino-sued-over-pulp-214715919.html
https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20211228/https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/17/business/miramax-tarantino-nft-pulp-fiction.html
https://www.yahoo.com/entertainment/samuel-l-jacksons-pulp-fiction-jheri-curl-wig-000105962.html
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007289809205171
https://web.archive.org/web/20220217105859/https://www.yahoo.com/entertainment/samuel-l-jacksons-pulp-fiction-jheri-curl-wig-000105962.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20211117221449/https://news.yahoo.com/quentin-tarantino-sued-over-pulp-214715919.html
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058515913206706
https://books.google.com/books?id=RRmcAQAAQBAJ&q=%22aldo+ray%22+interview&pg=PA50
https://web.archive.org/web/20211023050607/https://books.google.com/books?id=RRmcAQAAQBAJ&q=%22aldo+ray%22+interview&pg=PA50
http://www.chronologicalsnobbery.com/2007/11/quentin-tarantino-on-all-american-girl.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20160312154706/http://www.chronologicalsnobbery.com/2007/11/quentin-tarantino-on-all-american-girl.html
https://www.creativescreenwriting.com/method-writing-interview-with-quentin-tarantino/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210909053014/https://www.creativescreenwriting.com/method-writing-interview-with-quentin-tarantino/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104123#P1712
https://aleph.nkp.cz/F/?func=find-c&local_base=aut&ccl_term=ica=unn2006375178&CON_LNG=ENG
https://variety.com/2022/film/news/quentin-tarantino-miramax-pulp-fiction-nft-settlement-1235365550/
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/pulp-fiction-1994
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0362-4331
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/n00037922
https://www.bbfc.co.uk/BFF065215
https://www.sfgate.com/movies/article/FILM-REVIEW-Pulp-Grabs-You-Like-a-Novel-3024865.php
https://www.avclub.com/pam-grier-1798208273
https://www.nytimes.com/1994/09/11/movies/the-new-season-film-criminals-rendered-in-3-parts-poetically.html
https://variety.com/1993/film/news/tristar-pictures-slate-for-1993-103729/
https://www.newsweek.com/redemption-pulp-189436
https://jonathanrosenbaum.net/2023/03/the-world-according-to-harvey-and-bob/
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-pulp-fiction-1994
https://www.afi.com/afis-100-years-100-movies-10th-anniversary-edition/
https://www.rollingstone.com/tv-movies/tv-movie-news/quentin-tarantino-the-madman-of-movie-mayhem-186995/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220716045218/https://www.rollingstone.com/tv-movies/tv-movie-news/quentin-tarantino-the-madman-of-movie-mayhem-186995/
https://jonathanrosenbaum.net/2022/06/allusion-profusion/
https://www.afi.com/afis-100-years-100-movies/
https://prdaficalmjediwestussa.blob.core.windows.net/images/2019/08/handv400.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20110313150620/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/quotes400.pdf
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/quotes400.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20110313150538/https://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/laughs500.pdf
https://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/laughs500.pdf
https://www.afi.com/afis-100-years-100-thrills/
https://archive.org/details/Sight_and_Sound_1994_05_BFI_GB/page/n7/mode/2up
https://www.loc.gov/static/programs/national-film-preservation-board/documents/pulp%20fiction.pdf
https://ew.com/article/2007/06/18/new-classics-movies/
https://nationalboardofreview.org/award-years/1994/
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1994-12-11-mn-7795-story.html
https://bostonfilmcritics.org/past-winners-1990s/
https://web.archive.org/web/20121024041911/http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-search/we/Archives?p_product=AASB&p_theme=aasb&p_action=search&p_maxdocs=200&p_topdoc=1&p_text_direct-0=0EAD96057255BCDF&p_field_direct-0=document_id&p_perpage=10&p_sort=YMD_date:D&s_trackval=GooglePM
http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-search/we/Archives?p_product=AASB&p_theme=aasb&p_action=search&p_maxdocs=200&p_topdoc=1&p_text_direct-0=0EAD96057255BCDF&p_field_direct-0=document_id&p_perpage=10&p_sort=YMD_date:D&s_trackval=GooglePM
https://kcfcc.org/kcfcc-award-winners-1990-99/
https://www.nytimes.com/1994/12/16/movies/critics-honor-pulp-fiction-and-quiz-show.html
https://chicagofilmcritics.org/awards-blog/archives
https://archive.org/details/isbn_9780965931571
https://archive.org/details/rebelsonbacklots00waxm
https://books.google.com/books?id=oCprHBiGYoMC&pg=PA15
http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20150720-the-100-greatest-american-films
https://web.archive.org/web/20160916105535/http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20150720-the-100-greatest-american-films
https://web.archive.org/web/20230521051042/https://jonathanrosenbaum.net/2022/06/allusion-profusion/
