Pygmalion (1938 film)
Pygmalion is a 1938 British film based on the 1913 George Bernard Shaw play of the same name, and adapted by him for the screen. It stars Leslie Howard as Professor Henry Higgins and Wendy Hiller as Eliza Doolittle.
The film was a financial and critical success, and won an Oscar for Best Screenplay and three more nominations: Best Picture, Best Actor (Howard), and Best Actress (Hiller). The screenplay later was adapted into the 1956 theatrical musical My Fair Lady, which in turn led to the 1964 film of the same name.


== Adaptation ==
The Hungarian producer Gabriel Pascal wished to create a set of films based on Shaw's works, beginning with Pygmalion, and went to see Shaw in person to gain permission to do so. Shaw was reluctant to allow a film adaptation of Pygmalion owing to the low quality of previous film adaptations of his works, but Pascal managed to convince him (on the condition Shaw retained constant personal supervision of the adaptation) and later went on to adapt Major Barbara, Caesar and Cleopatra and Androcles and the Lion.
The resulting Pygmalion scenario by Cecil Lewis and W. P. Lipscomb removed exposition unnecessary outside a theatrical context and added new scenes and dialogue by Shaw. Ian Dalrymple, Anatole de Grunwald and Kay Walsh also made uncredited contributions to the screenplay. A long ballroom sequence was added, introducing an entirely new character, Count Aristid Karpathy (seen both here and in the musical My Fair Lady, named as Professor Zoltan Karpathy – mentioned in the final scene of the original play, but with no name or onstage appearance), written wholly by Shaw. He and his fellow writers also managed to retain the controversial line "Not bloody likely!" from the play's text, making Hiller possibly the first person to utter that swear word in a British film and giving rise to adverts for the film reading "Miss Pygmalion?  Not ****** likely!".


== Plot ==
While transcribing the conversation of passers-by one evening, linguist Professor Higgins is mistaken for a policeman, causing  protests from the Covent Garden flower seller Eliza Doolittle and various bystanders. As the incident is being cleared up, Higgins talks to Colonel Pickering, a fellow scholar of languages and dialects, who has come from India in order to meet him. Higgins argues that by teaching Eliza to speak correctly by his methods, she could have a better future and would even be able to pass as a duchess.
Next morning, Eliza arrives at Higgins' house to ask for elocution lessons. Colonel Pickering makes a bet with him, offering to pay all the expenses if the professor manages to fulfil his boast. Eliza is then taken upstairs to have a bath by Mrs Pearce, the housekeeper, and while this is taking place, Eliza's father, the dustman Alfred Doolittle, arrives to demand compensation for the loss of his daughter. Amused by Dolittle's roguish attitude, Higgins offers him £10, but Doolittle will only accept £5, explaining that as one of the "undeserving poor" he only wants enough for a drunken weekend.
After a rigorous internship, Eliza is sent as an experiment to an at-home gathering held by Mrs Higgins, the professor's mother. There, though speaking in a well-bred accent, Eliza scandalizes those present with her vulgar, slang-filled conversation and profanity. But one of the guests - young Freddy Eynsford-Hill - is fascinated by her. After the guests leave, Mrs Higgins voices her disgust that Eliza's two protectors are treating her more like a plaything than a human being.
Following weeks of further coaching, during which Freddy tries in vain to see her again, Eliza is accompanied by Higgins and Pickering to an embassy reception. There Higgins meets his former pupil, the Hungarian Count Aristid Karpathy, who has become famous for his ability to coach American heiresses in elocution and identify the origins of high society people from their way of speaking. Higgins and Pickering fear that Eliza will be exposed by him, but she manages to deceive him so successfully that he takes her for a Hungarian princess - explaining that her English is too perfect to be that of a native speaker.
Returning from the reception, Higgins and Pickering congratulate each other on their success, neglecting Eliza's contribution and commitment and especially her feelings. Wounded by his indifference, Eliza quarrels with the professor, throwing his slippers in his face when he asks for them, and complains that she has become unsuited to her former way of life. After he goes to bed, she leaves to take refuge at the home of Mrs Higgins.
Next morning Higgins visits his mother and is relieved to learn that Eliza is there. Before the two can meet, however, Mr Doolittle arrives to complain of the way Higgins has disrupted his life. The professor had jested to an American millionaire that the most original moralist in England was Doolittle, and when the millionaire died he had left Doolittle a bequest of £3000 annually to give six lectures a year, thus forcing respectability on the dustman. He is now on his way to a fashionable London church to marry his unwed partner and persuades Eliza, Pickering and Mrs Higgins to support him through the ordeal.
Higgins and Eliza are left alone for a while and he tries to persuade her to return home with him, but she objects that he simply takes her for granted. Instead she would prefer to marry Freddy, who is charming but has no income. When Higgins scoffs at this, Eliza horrifies him by threatening to use her newly-learned talents to give elocution lessons and so gain economic independence. 
Once the party leaves to attend the wedding, an upset Higgins returns home after a long walk and accidentally turns on a recording of Eliza's first visit. As he listens, he is surprised to hear the real Eliza at the door to his study, mockingly quoting her former self by announcing, "I washed my face and hands before I come, I did". He turns his back and asks her where his slippers are, leaving their future relationship ambiguous.


== Cast and crew ==
Wendy Hiller was chosen by Shaw to play Eliza Doolittle after she had appeared in stage productions of Pygmalion and Saint Joan – though the film's initial credits stated that this movie was introducing her, she had in fact already appeared on film in 1937's Lancashire Luck. Shaw's choice for Higgins had been Charles Laughton. The movie also includes the very first film appearance (brief and uncredited) of Anthony Quayle, as an Italian wigmaker. Cathleen Nesbitt, credited here as Kathleen Nesbitt in the role of 'A Lady,' portrayed Mrs. Higgins in the original Broadway production of My Fair Lady 18 years later.
The film's crew included David Lean (on his first major editing job; he also directed the montage sequence of Higgins teaching Eliza), set designer Laurence Irving and the camera operator Jack Hildyard (who later photographed Lean's The Bridge on the River Kwai, The Sound Barrier and Hobson's Choice).


== Cast ==
Leslie Howard as Professor Henry Higgins
Wendy Hiller as Eliza Doolittle
Wilfrid Lawson as Alfred Doolittle
Marie Lohr as Mrs. Higgins
Scott Sunderland as Colonel George Pickering
Jean Cadell as Mrs. Pearce
David Tree as Freddy Eynsford-Hill
Everley Gregg as Mrs. Eynsford-Hill
Leueen MacGrath as Clara Eynsford-Hill
Esme Percy as Count Aristid Karpathy
Violet Vanbrugh as the Ambassadress
Iris Hoey as  Ysabel, Social Reporter
Viola Tree as Perfide, Social Reporter
Irene Browne as the Duchess
Kate Cutler as The Grand Old Lady
Cathleen Nesbitt as Old Lady
O. B. Clarence as Mr. Birchwood, the Vicar
Wally Patch as First Bystander
H. F. Maltby as Second Bystander
Ivor Barnard as Sarcastic Bystander
Cecil Trouncer as First Policeman
Stephen Murray as Second Policeman
Eileen Beldon as Mrs Higgins’s Parlourmaid
Frank Atkinson as Taxi DriverUncredited

Leo Genn as a Prince
Moyna Macgill as a Woman Bystander
Patrick Macnee as an Extra
Anthony Quayle as Eliza's Hairdresser


== Reception ==
George Bernard Shaw, Cecil Lewis, Ian Dalrymple, and W. P. Lipscomb won the 1938 Academy Award for Writing (Adapted Screenplay). The film also received nominations for Best Picture, Best Actor (Howard) and Best Actress (Hiller). Shaw's reaction to his award was: "It's an insult for them to offer me any honour, as if they had never heard of me before – and it's very likely they never have. They might as well send some honour to George for being King of England."  However, his friend Mary Pickford later reported seeing the award on display in his home.
At the 1938 Venice Film Festival, Leslie Howard won the Volpi Cup and the film was nominated for the Mussolini Cup.
The copyright of the film Pygmalion lapsed in the United States in 1966 after its rights holder, Loew's Incorporated, failed to renew its copyright registration; as such, the film entered the public domain. However, in the 9th Circuit case Russell v. Price (1979), Shaw's estate was able to assert its rights in the underlying work (Shaw's play), and thus retain control over the film's distribution and public performance in the United States as a derivative work. US copyright in Shaw's play ended in 1988, which also restored the film to public-domain status.


== Bibliography ==
The Great British Films, pp. 45–48, Jerry Vermilye, 1978, Citadel Press, ISBN 0-8065-0661-X


== References ==


== External links ==
Pygmalion  is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive
Pygmalion at IMDb
Pygmalion at AllMovie
Pygmalion at the TCM Movie Database
Pygmalion at the American Film Institute Catalog
Pygmalion at Rotten Tomatoes
Pygmalion at the BFI's Screenonline"Pimpernel" Smith
6th Venice International Film Festival
9th Circuit
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Cottage on Dartmoor
Academy Award
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay)
Alan Jay Lerner
AllMovie
Amarilly of Clothes-Line Alley
American Princess (2005 TV series)
Anatole de Grunwald
Androcles and the Lion (1952 film)
Anthony Asquith
Anthony Quayle
Arthur Honegger
Ask Any Girl (film)
British Film Institute
Caesar and Cleopatra (film)
Cafe Mascot
Carrington V.C. (film)
Cathleen Nesbitt
Cecil Arthur Lewis
Cecil Trouncer
Channel Incident
Charles Laughton
Cottage to Let
Covent Garden
Dance Pretty Lady
David Lean
David Tree
Derivative work
ELIZA
Educating Rita
Eileen Beldon
Eliza Doolittle
Esme Percy
Everley Gregg
Everybody's Woman (1924 film)
Fanny by Gaslight (film)
Fine Manners
Flower seller
Frank Atkinson (actor)
Frederick Loewe
Freedom Radio
French Without Tears (film)
Gabriel Pascal
Galatea (film)
General Film Distributors
George Bernard Shaw
George VI
Get Me to the Church on Time
Guns of Darkness
H. F. Maltby
Half-Wits Holiday
Harry Stradling
He's All That
Hobson's Choice (1954 film)
Hoi Polloi (film)
I've Grown Accustomed to Her Face
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Could Have Danced All Night
Ian Dalrymple
Internet Archive
Irene Browne
Iris Hoey
Ivor Barnard
Jack Hildyard
Jean Cadell
Kate Cutler
Kay Walsh
Kitty (1945 film)
Lancashire Luck
Laurence Irving (set designer)
Leo Genn
Lerner and Loewe
Leslie Howard
Leslie Howard (actor)
Leueen MacGrath
Libel (film)
Loew's Incorporated
Major Barbara (film)
Man Pasand
Manam Oru Kurangu
Marie Lohr
Mary Pickford
Mighty Aphrodite
Moscow Nights (1935 film)
Moyna Macgill
My Fair Laddy
My Fair Lady
My Fair Lady (Broadway cast recording)
My Fair Lady (Oscar Peterson Trio album)
My Fair Lady (Shelly Manne album)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Fair Lady Loves Jazz
Nat King Cole Sings My Fair Lady
Never on Sunday
New York Times
O. B. Clarence
Ogo Bodhu Shundori
On Such a Night (1955 film)
On the Street Where You Live
One If by Clam, Two If by Sea
Orders to Kill
Patrick Macnee
Pies and Guys
Pigmalião 70
Profanity
Public domain
Pygmalion (1935 film)
Pygmalion (1937 film)
Pygmalion (1948 TV production)
Pygmalion (1983 film)
Pygmalion (mythology)
Pygmalion (play)
Pygmalion effect
Quiet Wedding
Reasonable Doubt (1936 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Rush Hour (1941 film)
Saint Joan (play)
Scott Sunderland (actor)
Screenonline
Selfie (TV series)
She's All That
Shooting Stars (1927 film)
Someone to Watch Over Me (Star Trek: Voyager)
Stephen Murray (actor)
Tell England (film)
The Barrier Miner
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Browning Version (1951 film)
The Captain from Köpenick (1931 film)
The Demi-Paradise
The Doctor's Dilemma (film)
The Final Test
The First Night of Pygmalion
The First of the Few
The Gentle Sex
The Great Songs from "My Fair Lady" and Other Broadway Hits
The Importance of Being Earnest (1952 film)
The Lucky Number
The Millionairess
The Net (1953 film)
The Opening of Misty Beethoven
The Rain in Spain
The Runaway Princess
The Sound Barrier
The Story of Papworth
The Street Where I Live
The V.I.P.s (film)
The Way to the Stars
The West Australian
The Winslow Boy (1948 film)
The Woman in Question
The Yellow Rolls-Royce
The Young Lovers (1954 film)
Totalmente Demais
Turner Classic Movies
Two Fathers (film)
Two Living, One Dead
Uncensored (film)
Underground (1928 film)
Unfinished Symphony (film)
Unheimliche Geschichten (1932 film)
Vapor (novel)
Venice Film Festival
Viola Tree
Violet Vanbrugh
W. P. Lipscomb
Wally Patch
We Dive at Dawn
Wendy Hiller
While the Sun Shines
Wilfrid Lawson (actor)
With a Little Bit of Luck
Wouldn't It Be Loverly
http://www.screenonline.org.uk/film/id/467426/
https://www.nytimes.com/1997/02/02/nyregion/cecil-lewis-98-pilot-in-wartime-writer-and-oscar-winner.html
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v39749
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0030637/
https://archive.org/details/pygmalionvideoqualityupgrade
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/87418/enwp
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1016943-pygmalion
http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article46376704
http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article48320694
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/6125
