Ray (film)
Ray is a 2004 American biographical musical drama film focusing on 30 years in the life of rhythm and blues musician Ray Charles. The independently produced film was co-produced and directed by Taylor Hackford, and written by James L. White from a story by Hackford and White. It stars Jamie Foxx in the title role, along with Kerry Washington, Clifton Powell, Harry Lennix, Terrence Howard, Larenz Tate, Richard Schiff and Regina King in supporting roles. Along with Hackford, the film was also produced by Stuart Benjamin, Howard Baldwin and Karen Baldwin.
It was released on October 29, 2004, by Universal Pictures. It received generally positive reviews from critics, with particular praise for Foxx's performance. It was also a commercial success, grossing $124.7 million worldwide against a production budget of $40 million.
Ray received many accolades and nominations and was nominated in six categories at the 77th Academy Awards. For his performance, Foxx won the Academy Award for Best Actor as well as the Golden Globe, BAFTA, Screen Actors Guild, and Critics' Choice, becoming the second actor to win all five major lead actor awards for the same performance, and the only one to win the Golden Globe in the Musical or Comedy category, rather than in Drama.
Charles had planned to attend a screening of the completed film but died of liver disease in June 2004, months prior to the premiere.


== Plot ==
Ray Charles Robinson is raised in poverty in Florida by his mother, Aretha. Learning to play piano at an early age, Ray is haunted by the accidental death of his younger brother George, who drowns in their mother's washbasin. Ray loses his vision and by age seven is completely blind. Aretha teaches him to be independent, eventually sending him to a school for the deaf and blind.
In 1946, Ray joins a white country band and wears sunglasses to hide his damaged eyes. Two years later, he travels to Seattle and joins a nightclub band, though the club's owner demands sexual favors and controls his money and career. After discovering he is being exploited, Ray signs his own record deal and leaves the band. Touring on the Chitlin' Circuit as "Ray Charles", he is introduced to heroin.
Ray is discovered by Ahmet Ertegun of Atlantic Records and records his first hit with Ertegun's song "Mess Around". In Houston, Ray falls in love with Della Bea, a preacher's daughter. Though she and others are unhappy about Ray mixing gospel with his music, he marries Della and continues to gain fame with "I Got a Woman" and "Hallelujah I Love Her So".
A pregnant Della finds Ray’s drug kit and confronts him. They reconcile after the birth of their first child, but Ray begins an affair with singer Mary Anne Fisher. In 1956, as Ray's popularity grows, he hires a trio to become "The Raelettes" and immediately falls for lead singer Margie Hendrix. They begin their own affair, and a jealous Mary Anne leaves.
A few years later, when Ray's band finishes a set early and the club’s owner demands they play the remaining time, Ray performs "What'd I Say" on the spot. His popularity rises through the 1950s and he moves his family to Los Angeles but continues to use heroin, straining his relationships with Della and Margie. In 1960, he signs a better contract with ABC Records, negotiating to own his master tapes.
Ray continues to experiment with his music, recording such hits as "Georgia on My Mind". Margie reveals she is pregnant, and cuts off their affair when Ray demands she end the pregnancy. He writes "Hit the Road Jack" with a solo by Margie, who uses her newfound recognition to embark on a solo career, while Ray struggles with his addiction.
In 1961, Ray encounters civil rights protestors outside his concert in Augusta, Georgia. Deciding not to play at the segregated venue, he cancels the concert and is banned from playing in Georgia. After he allows black and white audience members to dance together onstage during a concert in Indianapolis, his hotel room is raided by police. His arrest for heroin possession is made public, to Della’s dismay, but his record label has the charges dismissed.
In St. Louis, Ray performs the country-influenced "I Can't Stop Loving You" and is impressed by announcer Joe Adams, who joins his tour. Ray moves his family to Beverly Hills, and learns that Margie has died of an overdose. Joe alienates Ray’s band and his longtime friend and manager Jeff Brown, whom Ray fires, for stealing.
In 1965, Ray returns from a concert in Montreal and is again arrested for heroin possession. Dismissing his excuses, Della pleads with him to overcome his habit, and he is sentenced to drug rehabilitation. Suffering vivid nightmares during withdrawal, learns to play chess with Dr. Hacker and Hacker explains to him that his lawyer's arguments with the judge agreed to probation in Boston under the condition that he completes his drug rehab problem and agrees to take periodic drug tests, Ray has a vision of George and their mother, who, while praising the fact he became a success, chastises him for letting his addictions cripple him, with George telling Ray that his death was not his fault.  
By 1979, Ray has permanently quit heroin and receives an official apology from the state of Georgia, which names "Georgia On My Mind" the official state song. Ray goes on to have a long and successful career as a world-famous entertainer until his death in 2004.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
The film's production was entirely financed by Philip Anschutz, through his Bristol Bay Productions company. Taylor Hackford said in a DVD bonus feature that it took 15 years to make the film; or more specifically, as he later clarified in the liner notes of the soundtrack album, this is how long it took him to secure the financing. It was made on a budget of $40 million.
Charles was given a Braille copy of the film's original script; he objected only to a scene showing him taking up piano grudgingly, and a scene implying that Charles had shown mistress and lead "Raelette" Margie Hendricks how to shoot heroin.Denzel Washington was offered to play the title role, but he passed on the project. As stated in the DVD commentary, Foxx does not sing as Charles with exception to cover versions Charles performs in his earlier years. Kanye West and Ludacris have since made songs with Foxx singing as Charles in their songs "Gold Digger" and "Georgia", respectively.
Hackford stated in the DVD commentary that while Anschutz said the film would be made, he demanded that it be PG-13, and this caused him to walk away from the film five times. Because Charles and Ahmet Ertegun asked him to make the movie, he agreed to do the film as a PG-13 rating.  The film was rated PG-13 for "depiction of drug addiction, sexuality and some thematic elements".
In the DVD commentary, Hackford stated that no studio was interested in backing the movie. After it was shot independently, Universal Pictures stepped in to distribute it. Part of the reason Universal Pictures released it was because one of its executives used to hitchhike to Ray Charles concerts.The film's score was composed by Craig Armstrong. Ray debuted at the 2004 Toronto International Film Festival.


== Soundtrack ==


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Ray was released in theaters on October 29, 2004. The film went on to become a box-office hit, earning $75 million in the U.S. with an additional $50 million internationally, bringing its worldwide gross to $125 million.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 80% based on 206 reviews, with an average rating of 7.30/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "An engrossing and energetic portrait of a great musician's achievements and foibles, Ray is anchored by Jamie Foxx's stunning performance as Ray Charles." On Metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 73 out of 100, based on 40 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a rare "A+" grade.Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times wrote: "The movie would be worth seeing simply for the sound of the music and the sight of Jamie Foxx performing it. That it looks deeper and gives us a sense of the man himself is what makes it special." Ebert gave it a full 4 out of 4 stars. Richard Corliss of Time praised the cast, saying "If there were an Oscar for ensemble acting, Ray would win in a stroll." Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote: "Jamie Foxx gets so far inside the man and his music that he and Ray Charles seem to breathe as one."According to music critic Robert Christgau, "Foxx does the impossible—radiates something approaching the charisma of the artist he's portraying... that's the only time an actor has ever brought a pop icon fully to life on-screen."


=== Awards ===


=== Related projects ===
In the wake of his performance as Charles in the film, Foxx featured on hip-hop songs that sampled Charles' songs:

Georgia by Ludacris also featuring Field Mob, which samples Georgia on My Mind.
Gold Digger by Kanye West, which samples I Got a Woman.


== Differences from noted events ==
The film's credits state that Ray is based on true events, but includes some characters, names, locations, and events which have been changed and others which have been "fictionalized for dramatization purposes." Examples of the fictionalized scenes include:

The film's portrayal of Charles' brother George's death in 1935 shows him drowning in a metal tub after Ray does not attempt to rescue him because he assumes he is just playing; Ray's mother then discovers George drowning when calling the boys in for dinner. Though George did drown in a metal tub, Ray did try to pull him out, but was unable to do so due to George's large body weight; Ray then ran inside to tell his mother what happened.
Throughout the film, it is suggested that Ray's depression and heroin addiction were fueled by nervous breakdowns he had over the deaths of both George and his mother, as well as his blindness. In reality, the death of his mother did give him a nervous breakdown and was thought to be a leading cause of his depression, but the death of George and his blindness did not lead to nervous breakdowns.
It is true that Charles kicked his heroin addiction after undergoing treatment in a psychiatric hospital during 1965, as stated towards the end of the film, but it is not mentioned that he would often use gin and marijuana as substitutes for heroin throughout much of the remaining years of his life.
In the scene in which "What'd I Say" is being played, Charles is depicted as playing a Fender Rhodes electric piano, but in reality, he used a Wurlitzer electric piano on the original recording and began using it on tour in 1956, because he did not trust the tuning and quality of the pianos provided to him at every venue.
In the film, when his backing singer and mistress Margie Hendricks informs Ray she is pregnant with his child, Ray suggests she should have an abortion, out of loyalty to Della; Margie decides to keep the baby and soon leaves Ray to pursue a separate singing career after he refuses to abandon his family, move in with her and welcome the baby into his life. In reality, Hendricks did conceive a child with Charles and abandoned him after he refused to leave Della, but Charles never asked her to have an abortion, and welcomed any child he conceived, whether from Della or any mistress, into his personal life.
In the film Margie leaves the Raelettes in 1961, but in reality she was fired from the group by Ray in 1964 after a heated argument.
In the scene in which Charles is about to enter a segregated music hall in Augusta, Georgia, in 1961, a group of civil rights activists protesting just outside the hall successfully persuade him not to perform; Charles then declares that he will no longer perform in segregated public facilities and in response, the Georgia state legislature passes a resolution banning Charles from ever performing again in the state. In reality, a group of civil rights activists did successfully persuade Charles to reject this invitation, but the advice came in the form of a telegram rather than a street protest; Charles also did make up for the gig later, and was never banned from performing in Georgia and still accepted invitations to perform at segregated public facilities.
In the film, Margie Hendricks dies in 1964. However, in reality she died on July 14, 1973, but, no official cause of death was determined because an autopsy was not performed.
During the final scene in the film, when Charles' version of "Georgia on My Mind" becomes Georgia's state song, Charles is congratulated by his wife Della, and a resolution is also passed to lift the lifetime ban he had received in 1961 after he declared he would no longer perform at segregated public facilities. In reality, by the time "Georgia on My Mind" became Georgia's state song in 1979, Charles and Della had already divorced, so she was not present when Charles performed at the Georgia State Legislature; and since he had never been banned from performing in Georgia in the first place, no such resolution was ever passed.


== References ==


== External links ==

Ray at IMDb
Ray at the TCM Movie Database
Ray at AllMovie10th Critics' Choice Awards
11th Screen Actors Guild Awards
12 Years a Slave (film)
2004 Toronto International Film Festival
58th British Academy Film Awards
62nd Golden Globe Awards
77th Academy Awards
AARP Movies for Grownups Award for Best Movie for Grownups
ABC Records
A Fool for You
A Man and His Soul
A Message from the People
A Portrait of Ray
A Soldier's Story
A Song for You
A Time to Kill (1996 film)
About Schmidt
Academy Award for Best Actor
Against All Odds (1984 film)
Ahmet Ertegun
Ali (film)
AllMovie
An Officer and a Gentleman
Anthology (Ray Charles album)
Antoine Fuqua
Antwone Fisher (film)
Atlantic Records
Augusta, Georgia
Aunjanue Ellis
Bad Boys for Life
Beasts of the Southern Wild
Belfast (film)
Beverly Hills
Biographical film
Black Panther: Wakanda Forever
Black Panther (film)
Black Reel Award for Outstanding Film
Blood In Blood Out
Bokeem Woodbine
Box Office Mojo
Boyz n the Hood
Braille
Bristol Bay Productions
Busted (Harlan Howard song)
Bustin' Loose (film)
C. J. Sanders
Cadillac Records
Capote (film)
Chicago Sun-Times
Chitlin' Circuit
Chris Thomas King
CinemaScore
Clifton Powell
Coming to America
Confession Blues
Craig Armstrong (composer)
Crash (2004 film)
Creed (film)
Crying Time
Crying Time (album)
Curtis Armstrong
David "Fathead" Newman
David Krumholtz
Dedicated to You (Ray Charles album)
Denise Dowse
Denzel Washington
Do the Twist! with Ray Charles
Doing His Thing
Dolemite Is My Name
Dolores Claiborne (film)
Drama film
Dreamgirls (film)
Drown in My Own Tears
Drug rehabilitation
Everybody's All-American (film)
Fame (1980 film)
Fathead (album)
Field Mob
Florida
For Colored Girls
Friendship (Ray Charles album)
Frost/Nixon (film)
Genius & Friends
Genius + Soul = Jazz
Genius Loves Company
Georgia (Field Mob and Ludacris song)
Georgia State Capitol
Georgia on My Mind
Get Out
Girls Trip
Glory (1989 film)
Gold Digger (Kanye West song)
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy
Gospel music
Green Book (film)
Hail! Hail! Rock 'n' Roll
Hallelujah I Love Her So
Hank Crawford
Harry Lennix
Have a Smile with Me
Heaven Help Us All
Here We Go Again: Celebrating the Genius of Ray Charles
Here We Go Again (Ray Charles song)
Heroin
Hidden Figures
Hit the Road Jack
Houston
How Stella Got Her Groove Back
Howard Baldwin
I'll Be Good to You
I'm All Yours Baby
IMDb (identifier)
I Can't Stop Loving You
I Got a Woman
Independent film
Indianapolis
Ingredients in a Recipe for Soul
Invictus (film)
James L. White
Jamie Foxx
Jazz Number II
Jerry Wexler
Joe Adams (actor)
Judas and the Black Messiah
Julian Bond
Just Between Us (Ray Charles album)
Just Mercy
Kanye West
Karen Baldwin (producer)
Kerry Washington
King Richard (film)
Kurt Fuller
Lady Sings the Blues (film)
Lantana (film)
Larenz Tate
Lean on Me (film)
Let's Do It Again (1975 film)
Let's Go Get Stoned
Let the Good Times Roll (Louis Jordan song)
Lethal Weapon
List of accolades received by Ray (film)
Live in Concert (Ray Charles album)
Living for the City
Los Angeles
Love & Basketball
Love Country Style
Love Ranch
Loving (2016 film)
Lowell Fulson
Ludacris
Malcolm X (1992 film)
Margie Hendrix
Mary Ann (Ray Charles song)
Mastering (audio)
Mess Around
Metacritic
Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music
Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music Volume Two
Montreal
Moonlight (2016 film)
Musical film
My Kind of Jazz
My Kind of Jazz Part 3
My World (Ray Charles album)
Mystic River (film)
NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Motion Picture
Night Catches Us
One Mint Julep
Out of Time (2003 film)
Parker (2013 film)
Patrick Bauchau
Paul Hirsch (film editor)
Paweł Edelman
Peter Travers
Philip Anschutz
Porgy and Bess
Precious (film)
Proof of Life
Quincy Jones
Rare Genius
Ray's Moods
Ray (soundtrack)
Ray Charles
Ray Charles (album)
Ray Charles Greatest Hits
Ray Charles Invites You to Listen
Ray Charles Live
Ray Charles Robinson
Ray Charles and Betty Carter
Ray Charles at Newport
Ray Charles discography
Ray Charles in Concert
Ray Charles in Person
Ray Sings, Basie Swings
Red Tails
Regina King
Remember the Titans
Rhodes piano
Rhythm and blues
Richard Corliss
Richard Schiff
Rick Gomez
Robert Christgau
Robert Wisdom
Roger Ebert
Rolling Stone
Rotten Tomatoes
Seattle
Selma (film)
Seven Spanish Angels
Sharon Warren
Sister Act
Soul Brothers
Soul Food (film)
Soul Meeting
Spotlight (film)
St. Louis
Star Wars: The Last Jedi
Straight Outta Compton (film)
Strong Love Affair
Stuart Benjamin
Sweet & Sour Tears
Swing Time Records
Take These Chains from My Heart
Tangerine Records (1962)
Taylor Hackford
Teenage Father
Terrence Howard
The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel
The Best Man (1999 film)
The Best of Ray Charles
The Birth of Soul
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Comedian (2016 film)
The Descendants
The Devil's Advocate (1997 film)
The Fighting Temptations
The Genius After Hours
The Genius Hits the Road
The Genius Sings the Blues
The Genius of Ray Charles
The Great Debaters
The Great Ray Charles
The Greatest (1977 film)
The Harder They Fall (2021 film)
The Help (film)
The Hollywood Reporter
The Hurricane (1999 film)
The Idolmaker
The Irishman
The King's Speech
The Last King of Scotland (film)
The Pursuit of Happyness
The Raelettes
The Savages (film)
The Secret Life of Bees (film)
The Theory of Everything (2014 film)
The United States vs. Billie Holiday
The Village Voice
The Woman King
Through the Eyes of Love (Ray Charles album)
Time (magazine)
Together Again (Buck Owens song)
Together Again (Ray Charles album)
Tom Dowd
Top Gun: Maverick
Training Day
Tribute to Uncle Ray
True Genius
True to Life (Ray Charles album)
Turner Classic Movies
Unchain My Heart (song)
Universal Pictures
Volcanic Action of My Soul
Waiting to Exhale
Warwick Davis
Wendell Pierce
What'd I Say
What'd I Say (album)
White Nights (1985 film)
Wurlitzer electric piano
Yes Indeed! (Ray Charles album)
You Are My Sunshine
You Don't Know Me (Cindy Walker song)
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/life_and_art/2004/10/its_a_shame_about_ray.html
http://www.robertchristgau.com/xg/rock/useless-05.php
http://www.historylink.org/index.cfm?DisplayPage=output.cfm&file_id=5707
http://www.stfrancis.edu/content/historyinthemovies/ray.htm
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v287477
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0350258/
https://www.today.com/popculture/music-legend-ray-charles-dies-73-wbna5182959
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/ray
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/why-cinemascore-matters-box-office-225563
https://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=ray.htm
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/ray
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/ray-2004
http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,713188,00.html
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-reviews/ray-124886/
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0350258/trivia
https://longreads.com/2020/09/02/a-lovers-blues-margie-hendrix/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/453385/enwp
https://books.google.com/books?id=iV4sGvUChJoCc&q=margie+hendrix+death&pg=PA133
