Romeo and Juliet (1936 film)
Romeo and Juliet is a 1936 American film adapted from the play by William Shakespeare, directed by George Cukor from a screenplay by Talbot Jennings. The film stars Leslie Howard as Romeo and Norma Shearer as Juliet, and the supporting cast features John Barrymore, Basil Rathbone, and Andy Devine.


== Plot ==
In the Italian city of Verona, two noble families, the Montagues and the Capulets, are locked in a bitter feud. Despite the longstanding animosity between their families, Romeo Montague and Juliet Capulet meet and fall deeply in love at a masquerade ball.
The two secretly marry with the help of Juliet's nurse and Friar Laurence, hoping that their union might bring peace to their feuding families. However, the street brawls between the Montagues and Capulets intensify. Mercutio, Romeo's close friend, is killed by Tybalt, Juliet's cousin. In a fit of rage, Romeo avenges Mercutio's death by killing Tybalt, leading to his banishment from Verona.
Juliet is devastated by both Tybalt's death and Romeo's banishment. Her parents, unaware of her secret marriage to Romeo, arrange for her to marry Paris. Desperate to avoid this fate and be with Romeo, Juliet takes a potion that makes her appear dead. Romeo, not knowing it is a ruse and believing Juliet to be truly dead, returns to Verona and takes poison beside her. Juliet awakens, finds Romeo dead, and kills herself.
The tragic deaths of the young lovers lead the Montagues and Capulets to reconcile, but it is a reconciliation born from great loss and sorrow.
Cukor's 1936 adaptation stays largely faithful to Shakespeare's text but makes use of the cinematic medium to enhance the drama and romance of the story. The film, set against lavish sets and costumes, was a grand production for its time and featured Norma Shearer and Leslie Howard in the titular roles.


== Cast ==

Uncredited cast includes Wallis Clark, Katherine DeMille, Fred Graham, Dorothy Granger, Ronald Howard, Lon McCallister, and Ian Wolfe.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Producer Irving Thalberg pushed MGM for five years to make a film of Romeo and Juliet, in spite of studio head Louis B. Mayer's resistance. Mayer believed that the mass audience considered the Bard over their heads, and also he was concerned with the studio's budget constraints during the early years of the Great Depression. It was only when Jack L. Warner announced his intention to film Max Reinhardt's A Midsummer Night's Dream at Warner Bros. that Mayer, not to be outdone, gave Thalberg the go-ahead. The success of a 1934 Broadway revival also encouraged the idea of a film version. It starred Katharine Cornell as Juliet, Basil Rathbone as Romeo, Brian Aherne as Mercutio, and Edith Evans as The Nurse. Rathbone is the only actor from the 1934 revival to appear in the film, albeit in the role of Tybalt rather than Romeo. On the stage Tybalt was played by nineteen year old Orson Welles.
Thalberg's stated intention was "to make the production what Shakespeare would have wanted had he possessed the facilities of cinema." He went to great lengths to establish authenticity and the film's intellectual credentials: researchers were sent to Verona to take photographs for the designers; the paintings of Botticelli, Bellini, Carpaccio, and Gozzoli were studied to provide visual inspiration; and two academic advisers (John Tucker Murray of Harvard and William Strunk Jr. of Cornell) were flown to the set, with instructions to criticise the production freely.


=== Production ===
Thalberg had only one choice for director: George Cukor, who was known as "the women's director". Thalberg's vision was that the performance of Norma Shearer, his wife, would dominate the picture. In addition to such noted Shakespearean actors as Howard and Barrymore, Thalberg cast many screen actors and brought in East Coast drama coaches (such as Frances Robinson Duff who coached Shearer) to teach them. In consequence, actors previously noted for naturalism were found to give more stage-like performances. The shoot extended to six months, and the budget reached $2 million, MGM's most expensive sound film up to that time.As in most Shakespeare-based screenplays, Cukor and his screenwriter Talbot Jennings cut much of the original play, using around 45% of it. Many of these cuts are common ones in the theatre, such as the second chorus and the comic scene of Peter with the musicians. Others are filmic: designed to replace words with action, or rearranging scenes in order to introduce groups of characters in longer narrative sequences. Jennings retained more of Shakespeare's poetry for the young lovers than any of his big-screen successors. Several scenes are interpolated, including three sequences featuring Friar John in Mantua. In contrast, the role of Friar Laurence (an important character in the play) is much reduced. A number of scenes are expanded as opportunities for visual spectacle, including the opening brawl (set against the backdrop of a religious procession), the wedding and Juliet's funeral. The party scene, choreographed by Agnes de Mille, includes Rosaline (an unseen character in Shakespeare's script) who rebuffs Romeo. The role of Peter is enlarged, and played by Andy Devine as a faint-hearted bully. He speaks lines which Shakespeare gave to other Capulet servants, making him the instigator of the opening brawl. The film includes two songs drawn from other plays by Shakespeare: "Come Away Death" from Twelfth Night and "Honour, Riches, Marriage, Blessing" from The Tempest.Clusters of images are used to define the central characters: Romeo is first sighted leaning against a ruined building in an arcadian scene, complete with a pipe-playing shepherd and his dog; the livelier Juliet is associated with Capulet's formal garden, with its decorative fish pond.Herbert Stothart draws on Pyotr Ilyich Tschaikovsky's Fantasy Overture “Romeo and Juliet” when creating the film's score. Stothart also uses the stately Pavane from Peter Warlock's Capriol suite. Neither of these sources are credited.  


== Premiere ==
On the night of the Los Angeles premiere of the film at the Carthay Circle Theatre, legendary MGM producer Irving Thalberg, husband of Norma Shearer, died at age 37. The stars in attendance were so grief-stricken that publicist Frank Whitbeck, standing in front of the theater, abandoned his usual policy of interviewing them for a radio broadcast as they entered and simply announced each one as he or she arrived.


== Reception ==
According to MGM records, the film earned $2,075,000 worldwide but because of its high production cost lost $922,000.Some critics liked the film, but on the whole, neither critics nor the public responded enthusiastically. Graham Greene wrote that he was "less than ever convinced that there is an aesthetic justification for filming Shakespeare at all... the effect of even the best scenes is to distract." "Ornate but not garish, extravagant but in perfect taste, expansive but never overwhelming, the picture reflects great credit upon its producers and upon the screen as a whole", wrote Frank Nugent in a rave review for The New York Times. "It is a dignified, sensitive and entirely admirable Shakespearean—not Hollywoodean—production." Variety called the film a "faithful" adaptation with "very beautiful" costuming, but also found it "not too imaginative" and "a long sit" at over two hours. Film Daily raved that it was a "superb and important achievement" and "one of the most important contributions to the screen since the inception of talking pictures." John Mosher of The New Yorker called it "a very definite achievement" but "somewhat cumbersome", writing "This is a good, sensible presentation of 'Romeo and Juliet,' but it won't be one you'll hark back to when you are discussing the movies as great art, if you do ever discuss them as great art."Many moviegoers considered the film too "arty", staying away as they had from Warner's A Midsummer Night's Dream a year before and leading Hollywood to abandon the Bard for over a decade. The film nevertheless received four Oscar nominations  and for many years was considered one of the great MGM classics. In his annual Movie and Video Guide, Leonard Maltin gives both this film version and the popular 1968 Franco Zeffirelli version (with Olivia Hussey and Leonard Whiting) an equal rating of three-and-a-half stars.More recently, scholar Stephen Orgel describes Cukor's film as "largely miscast ... with a preposterously mature pair of lovers in Leslie Howard and Norma Shearer, and an elderly John Barrymore as a stagey Mercutio decades out of date." Barrymore was in his fifties, and played Mercutio as a flirtatious tease. Orgel adds that Tybalt, often portrayed as a hot-headed troublemaker, is played by Basil Rathbone as stuffy and pompous.Patricia Tatspaugh observes that subsequent film versions made use of "younger, less experienced but more photogenic actors" in the central roles. Cukor, interviewed in 1970, said of this film: "It's one picture that if I had to do over again, I'd know how. I'd get the garlic and the Mediterranean into it."


== Awards and honors ==
In 2002, the American Film Institute nominated this film for AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions.The film is listed in the book The New York Times' Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made (1999 and 2004)).


== Legacy ==
A colour roll of 16mm Kodachrome filmed by co-star Leslie Howard during the opening exterior sequence with Howard and Reginald Denny in costume as the crew set up is featured in the 2016 documentary Leslie Howard: The Man Who Gave a Damn.


== See also ==
Romeo and Juliet on screen


== References ==


== External links ==
Romeo and Juliet at IMDb 
Romeo and Juliet at the TCM Movie Database
Romeo and Juliet at AllMovie
Romeo and Juliet at the American Film Institute Catalog
Romeo and Juliet at Rotten Tomatoes
Romeo and Juliet at Virtual History
George Cukor and cast going over script left to right: Edna Mae Oliver, Cukor, Norma Shearer, Leslie Howard, John Barrymore, Basil Rathbone, Violet Kemble-Cooper, ? unidentified, Henry Kolker& Juliet
(Don't Fear) The Reaper
AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Bill of Divorcement (1932 film)
A Day at the Races (film)
A Double Life (1947 film)
A Free Soul
A Lady's Morals
A Life of Her Own
A Midsummer Night's Dream (1935 film)
A Night at the Opera (film)
A Star Is Born (1954 film)
A Village Romeo and Juliet
A Woman's Face
A rose by any other name would smell as sweet
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Adam's Rib
After Juliet
Agnes de Mille
Alexander Kazantsev
AllMovie
American Film Institute
Amor Prohibido (song)
Andy Devine
Angelo (song)
Anna Christie (1930 English-language film)
Arcadia (utopia)
As You Desire Me (film)
Atomy
BBC Television Shakespeare
Bare: A Pop Opera
Basil Rathbone
Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ (1925 film)
Benozzo Gozzoli
Benvolio
Bhowani Junction (film)
Billy the Kid (1930 film)
Bolji život
Bombshell (1933 film)
Born Yesterday (1950 film)
Boys Don't Cry (1999 film)
Brian Aherne
Broadway Melody of 1938
Brown of Harvard (1926 film)
C. Aubrey Smith
Cambridge University Press
Camille (1936 film)
Capriol Suite
Carthay Circle Theatre
Cedric Gibbons
Characters in Romeo and Juliet
Charles Higham (biographer)
Cherish (Madonna song)
China Seas (film)
Condé Nast
Conway Tearle
Cornell University
Count Paris
David Copperfield (1935 film)
Dinner at Eight (1933 film)
Donkey in Lahore
Dorian Gray (2009 film)
Dorothy Granger
Edith Evans
Edna May Oliver
Edward, My Son
Edwin B. Willis
Ephesian Tale
Eskimo (1933 film)
Fame (musical)
Film Daily
Flesh and the Devil
Frank Nugent
Freaks (1932 film)
Fred Graham (actor)
Fredric Hope
Friar Laurence
Garlic
Gaslight (1944 film)
George Cukor
Giovanni Bellini
Girls About Town (film)
Giulietta e Romeo (Vaccai)
Giulietta e Romeo (Zingarelli)
Giulietta e Romeo (musical)
Gloria (opera)
Graham Greene
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Great Depression
Grumpy (1930 film)
Hallelujah (film)
Hamateur Night
Harina de otro costal
Harlequinade (Rattigan)
Harrison's Reports and Film Reviews
Harvard University
He Who Gets Slapped (film)
Heller in Pink Tights
Henry Kolker
Her Cardboard Lover
Herbert Stothart
His Glorious Night
His Hour
Holiday (1938 film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
I Am Unicorn
I Capuleti e i Montecchi
Ian Wolfe
Inge Sylten and Heinz Drosihn
Inspiration (1931 film)
Internet Movie Database
Interpolated
Into the Gauntlet
Irving Thalberg
Irving Thalberg Jr.
It Should Happen to You
Jack L. Warner
John Barrymore
John Mosher (writer)
Juliet
Juliet Capulet
Just a Gigolo (1931 film)
Justine (1969 film)
K-On!
Katharine Cornell
Katherine DeMille
Keeper of the Flame (film)
Kissing You (Des'ree song)
Km. 0
La Bohème (1926 film)
Laugh, Clown, Laugh
Leonard Whiting
Les Chouans
Les Girls
Leslie Howard
Leslie Howard (actor)
Let's Make Love
Let Us Be Gay
Letters to Juliet
Letty Lynton
List of films based on Romeo and Juliet
Little Women (1933 film)
Lobby card
Loews Cineplex Entertainment
Lon McCallister
London After Midnight (film)
Louis B. Mayer
Love Among the Ruins (film)
Love Me Again (John Newman song)
Love Story (Taylor Swift song)
Love Theme from Romeo and Juliet
Mademoiselle Juliette
Margaret Booth
Marie Antoinette (1938 film)
Mata Hari (1931 film)
Max Reinhardt
Maytime (1937 film)
Mercutio
Merry-Go-Round (1923 film)
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Millennium Dome Show
Molly (1999 film)
Montagues and Capulets
Moonshine River
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Wedding and Other Secrets
New Moon (novel)
Nicholas Nickleby
Nicholas Nickleby (1912 film)
Nicholas Nickleby (2002 film)
No More Ladies
Norma Shearer
Nothing Broken but My Heart
Nurse (Romeo and Juliet)
Olivia Hussey
Once on This Island
Orson Welles
Our Betters
Panic Button (1964 film)
Pat and Mike
Pay as You Exit
People's Romeo
Peter Warlock
Peut-être toi
Phileine Says Sorry
Possessed (1931 film)
Prince Charming (2001 film)
Private Lives (film)
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky
Pyramus and Thisbe
Queen Mab
Radio and Juliet
Ralph Forbes
Rasputin and the Empress
Red-Headed Woman
Red Dust (1932 film)
Redemption (1930 film)
Reginald Denny (actor)
Rendez-vous (1985 film)
Rich and Famous (1981 film)
Riffraff (1936 film)
Riptide (1934 film)
Robert Warwick
Rockabye (1932 film)
Romanoff and Juliet (play)
Romeo
Romeo & Julia
Romeo & Juliet (2013 film)
Romeo + Juliet
Romeo + Juliet (ballet)
Romeo + Juliet (soundtrack)
Romeo Montague
Romeo and Juliet
Romeo and Juliet: the Tomb Scene
Romeo and Juliet (1900 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1908 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1916 Fox film)
Romeo and Juliet (1916 Metro Pictures film)
Romeo and Juliet (1940 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1953 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1954 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1955 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1964 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1968 film)
Romeo and Juliet (1968 film soundtrack)
Romeo and Juliet (2006 film)
Romeo and Juliet (2013 Broadway play)
Romeo and Juliet (Alec R. Costandinos song)
Romeo and Juliet (Cranko)
Romeo and Juliet (Dire Straits song)
Romeo and Juliet (Hebald)
Romeo and Juliet (Lavery)
Romeo and Juliet (Love and War)
Romeo and Juliet (MacMillan)
Romeo and Juliet (Nureyev)
Romeo and Juliet (Pastor)
Romeo and Juliet (Prokofiev)
Romeo and Juliet (Tchaikovsky)
Romeo and Juliet (disambiguation)
Romeo and Juliet effect
Romeo and Juliet in Sarajevo
Romeo and Juliet on screen
Romeo und Julia (Blacher opera)
Romeo und Julia (Sutermeister opera)
Romeo und Julie
Romeo y Julieta (TV series)
Romeo × Juliet
Romiette and Julio
Romil & Jugal
Roméo et Juliette
Roméo et Juliette (Berlioz)
Roméo et Juliette (musical)
Ronald Howard (British actor)
Ronny & Julia
Ronny & Julia (TV series)
Rosaline
Rosaline (soundtrack)
Rotten Tomatoes
Sandro Botticelli
Say You'll Be Mine (Steps song)
Shakespeare: The Animated Tales
She Died a Lady
Sherlock Gnomes
Show People
Skin (American TV series)
Smart Girls Get What They Want
Smilin' Through (1932 film)
Something's Got to Give
Star-Crossed (TV series)
Star-Crossed (album)
Star-crossed
Starcrossed (song)
Statutory rape
Still Star-Crossed
Story within a story
Strange Interlude (film)
String Quartet No. 1 (Beethoven)
Such Tweet Sorrow
Susan and God
Sylvia Scarlett
Talbot Jennings
Tarnished Lady
Tarzan the Ape Man (1932 film)
The Actress
The Barretts of Wimpole Street (1934 film)
The Belle of Mayfair
The Big House (1930 film)
The Big Parade
The Blue Bird (1976 film)
The Broadway Melody
The Champ (1931 film)
The Chapman Report
The Corn Is Green (1979 film)
The Crowd (1928 film)
The Divorcee
The Faraway Lurs
The Frog Prince (1984 film)
The Good Earth (film)
The Guardsman
The Hollywood Revue
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1923 film)
The Kiss (1929 film)
The Last of Mrs. Cheyney (1929 film)
The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby (1947 film)
The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby (2001 film)
The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby (play)
The Love of the Last Tycoon
The Marrying Kind
The Merry Widow (1925 film)
The Merry Widow (1934 film)
The Model and the Marriage Broker
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Philadelphia Story (film)
The Picture of Dorian Gray
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1910 film)
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1913 film)
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1915 film)
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1916 film)
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1917 German film)
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1917 Hungarian film)
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1945 film)
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1976 TV)
The Road to Mandalay (1926 film)
The Rogue Song
The Royal Family of Broadway
The Secret Six
The Sin of Madelon Claudet
The Sky Is Everywhere
The Songs of a Sentimental Bloke
The Stolen Dormouse
The Student Prince in Old Heidelberg
The Tempest
The Temptress
The Thief of Baghead
The Tower of Lies
The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet
The Trap (1922 film)
The Trial of Mary Dugan (1929 film)
The Unholy Three (1925 film)
The Unholy Three (1930 film)
The Virtuous Sin
The Wandering Jew (Sue novel)
The White Mercedes
The Women (1939 film)
Torrent (1926 film)
Trader Horn (1931 film)
Tragic Lovers
Travels with My Aunt (film)
Troilus and Criseyde
Tugboat Annie
Tumbleweeds (1999 film)
Turner Classic Movies
Twelfth Night
Twelve Miles Out
Two-Faced Woman
Tybalt
Unseen character
Upper West Side Story
Upside Down (2012 film)
Valencia (1926 film)
Variety (magazine)
Variety Film Reviews
Verona
Violet Kemble-Cooper
Vittore Carpaccio
Voice of the City
W Juliet
Wallis Clark
Wandering Son
Warm Bodies
Warner Bros.
Way for a Sailor
West Side Story
West of Zanzibar (1928 film)
What Every Woman Knows (1934 film)
What Price Hollywood?
Where East Is East
White Shadows in the South Seas
Wild Is the Wind
William Daniels (cinematographer)
William Painter (author)
William Shakespeare
William Strunk Jr.
Winged Victory (film)
Zaza (1939 film)
http://www.basilrathbone.net/films/romeojuliet/romeojulietcast2.jpg
http://www.virtual-history.com/movie/film/5321/romeo-and-juliet
http://www.ibdb.com/production.php?id=10436
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/passions400.pdf
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9E00E0D81E3FEE3BBC4951DFBE66838D629EDE
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v42026
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0028203/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0028203/fullcredits#cast
https://archive.org/details/cambridgecompani00jack
https://archive.org/details/cambridgecompani00jack/page/n31
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1036976_romeo_and_juliet
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1081181#identifiers
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/5167
https://books.google.com/books?id=55qlWjbs14sC
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/400/enwp
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/nr2002044659
https://viennasclassichollywood.com/2018/02/16/leslie-howard-the-man-who-gave-a-damn/
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/12/leslie-howard-found-footage
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0261-3077
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f6qZUCi7ToQ
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/400/romeo-and-juliet#articles-reviews?articleId=497773
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1081181#P345
