Schindler's List
Schindler's List is a 1993 American epic historical drama film directed and produced by Steven Spielberg and written by Steven Zaillian. It is based on the 1982 novel Schindler's Ark by Australian novelist Thomas Keneally. The film follows Oskar Schindler, a German industrialist who saved more than a thousand mostly Polish–Jewish refugees from the Holocaust by employing them in his factories during World War II. It stars Liam Neeson as Schindler, Ralph Fiennes as SS officer Amon Göth, and Ben Kingsley as Schindler's Jewish accountant Itzhak Stern.
Ideas for a film about the Schindlerjuden (Schindler Jews) were proposed as early as 1963. Poldek Pfefferberg, one of the Schindlerjuden, made it his life's mission to tell Schindler's story. Spielberg became interested when executive Sidney Sheinberg sent him a book review of Schindler's Ark. Universal Pictures bought the rights to the novel, but Spielberg, unsure if he was ready to make a film about the Holocaust, tried to pass the project to several directors before deciding to direct it.
Principal photography took place in Kraków, Poland, over 72 days in 1993. Spielberg shot in black and white and approached the film as a documentary. Cinematographer Janusz Kamiński wanted to create a sense of timelessness. John Williams composed the score, and violinist Itzhak Perlman performed the main theme.
Schindler's List premiered on November 30, 1993, in Washington, D.C., and was released on December 15, 1993, in the United States. Often listed among the greatest films ever made, the film received universal acclaim for its tone, acting (particularly Neeson, Fiennes, and Kingsley), atmosphere, score, cinematography, and Spielberg's direction; it was also a box office success, earning $322.2 million worldwide on a $22 million budget. It was nominated for twelve awards at the 66th Academy Awards, and won seven, including Best Picture, Best Director (for Spielberg), Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Original Score. The film won numerous other awards, including seven BAFTAs and three Golden Globe Awards. In 2007, the American Film Institute ranked Schindler's List 8th on its list of the 100 best American films of all time. The film was designated as "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress in 2004 and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.


== Plot ==
In Kraków during World War II, the Nazis force local Polish Jews into the overcrowded Kraków Ghetto. Oskar Schindler, a German Nazi Party member from Czechoslovakia, arrives in the city, hoping to make his fortune. He bribes Wehrmacht (German armed forces) and SS officials, acquiring a factory to produce enamelware. Schindler hires Itzhak Stern, a Jewish official with contacts among black marketeers and the Jewish business community; he handles administration and helps Schindler arrange financing. Stern ensures that as many Jewish workers as possible are deemed essential to the German war effort to prevent them from being taken by the SS to concentration camps or killed. Meanwhile, Schindler maintains friendly relations with the Nazis and enjoys his new wealth and status as an industrialist.
SS-Untersturmführer (second lieutenant) Amon Göth arrives in Kraków to oversee construction of the Płaszów concentration camp. When the camp is ready, he orders the ghetto liquidated: two thousand Jews are transported to Płaszów, and two thousand others are killed in the streets by the SS. Schindler witnesses the massacre and is profoundly affected. He particularly notices a young girl in a red coat who hides from the Nazis and later sees her body on a wagonload of corpses. Schindler is careful to maintain his friendship with Göth and continues to enjoy SS support, mostly through bribery. Göth brutalizes his Jewish maid Helen Hirsch and randomly shoots people from the balcony of his villa; the prisoners are in constant fear for their lives. As time passes, Schindler's focus shifts from making money to trying to save as many lives as possible. To better protect his workers, Schindler bribes Göth into allowing him to build a sub-camp at his factory.
As the Germans begin losing the war, Göth is ordered to ship the remaining Jews at Płaszów to Auschwitz concentration camp. Schindler asks Göth for permission to move his workers to a munitions factory he plans to build in Brünnlitz near his hometown of Zwittau. Göth reluctantly agrees but charges a huge bribe. Schindler and Stern prepare a list of people to be transferred to Brünnlitz instead of Auschwitz. The list eventually includes 1,100 names.
As the Jewish workers are transported by train to Brünnlitz, the women and girls are mistakenly redirected to Auschwitz-Birkenau; Schindler bribes Rudolf Höss, the commandant of Auschwitz, for their release. At the new factory, Schindler forbids the SS guards from entering the production area without permission and encourages the Jews to observe the Sabbath. Over the next seven months, he spends his fortune bribing Nazi officials and buying shell casings from other companies. Due to Schindler's machinations, the factory does not produce any usable armaments. He runs out of money in 1945, just as Germany surrenders.
As a Nazi Party member and war profiteer, Schindler must flee the advancing Red Army to avoid capture. The SS guards at the factory have been ordered to kill the Jewish workforce, but Schindler persuades them not to do so. Bidding farewell to his workers, he prepares to head west, hoping to surrender to the Americans. The workers give him a signed statement attesting to his role in saving Jewish lives and present him with a ring engraved with a Talmudic quotation: "Whoever saves one life saves the world entire". Schindler breaks down in tears, feeling he should have done more, and is comforted by the workers before he and his wife leave in their car. When the Schindlerjuden awaken the next morning, a mounted Soviet officer announces that they have been liberated but warns them not to go east because "they hate you there". The Jews then walk into the countryside.
An epilogue reveals that Göth was convicted of crimes against humanity and executed via hanging, while Schindler's marriage and businesses failed following the war. In the present, many of the surviving Schindlerjuden and the actors portraying them visit Schindler's grave and place stones on its marker (a traditional Jewish sign of respect for the dead), after which Liam Neeson lays two roses.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Poldek Pfefferberg, one of the Schindlerjuden, made it his life's mission to tell the story of his savior. Pfefferberg attempted to produce a biopic of Oskar Schindler with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) in 1963, with Howard Koch writing, but the deal fell through. In 1982, Thomas Keneally published his historical novel Schindler's Ark, which he wrote after a chance meeting with Pfefferberg in Los Angeles in 1980. MCA president Sid Sheinberg sent director Steven Spielberg a New York Times review of the book. Spielberg, astounded by Schindler's story, jokingly asked if it was true. "I was drawn to it because of the paradoxical nature of the character," he said. "What would drive a man like this to suddenly take everything he had earned and put it all in the service of saving these lives?" Spielberg expressed enough interest for Universal Pictures to buy the rights to the novel. At their first meeting in spring 1983, he told Pfefferberg he would start filming in ten years. In the end credits of the film, Pfefferberg is credited as a consultant under the name Leopold Page.
Spielberg was unsure if he was mature enough to make a film about the Holocaust, and the project remained "on [his] guilty conscience". Spielberg tried to pass the project to director Roman Polanski, but he refused Spielberg's offer. Polanski's mother was killed at Auschwitz, and he had lived in and survived the Kraków Ghetto. Polanski eventually directed his own Holocaust drama The Pianist (2002). Spielberg also offered the film to Sydney Pollack and Martin Scorsese, who was attached to direct Schindler's List in 1988. However, Spielberg was unsure of letting Scorsese direct the film, as  "I'd given away a chance to do something for my children and family about the Holocaust." Spielberg offered him the chance to direct the 1991 remake of Cape Fear instead. Scorsese would later admit in an interview that while he believed his version of the film might've been good, he had no regrets passing it to Spielberg stating that "it would not have been the hit that it became". Billy Wilder expressed an interest in directing the film as a memorial to his family, most of whom were murdered in the Holocaust. Brian De Palma also refused an offer to direct.Spielberg finally decided to take on the project when he noticed that Holocaust deniers were being given serious consideration by the media. With the rise of neo-Nazism after the fall of the Berlin Wall, he worried that people were too accepting of intolerance, as they were in the 1930s. Sid Sheinberg greenlit the film on condition that Spielberg made Jurassic Park first. Spielberg later said, "He knew that once I had directed Schindler I wouldn't be able to do Jurassic Park." The picture was assigned a small budget of $22 million, as Holocaust films are not usually profitable. Spielberg forwent a salary for the film, calling it "blood money", and believed it would fail.In 1983, Keneally was hired to adapt his book, and he turned in a 220-page script. His adaptation focused on Schindler's numerous relationships, and Keneally admitted he did not compress the story enough. Spielberg hired Kurt Luedtke, who had adapted the screenplay of Out of Africa, to write the next draft. Luedtke gave up almost four years later, as he found Schindler's change of heart too unbelievable. During his time as director, Scorsese hired Steven Zaillian to write a script. When he was handed back the project, Spielberg found Zaillian's 115-page draft too short, and asked him to extend it to 195 pages. Spielberg wanted more focus on the Jews in the story, and he wanted Schindler's transition to be gradual and ambiguous instead of a sudden breakthrough or epiphany. He also extended the ghetto liquidation sequence, as he "felt very strongly that the sequence had to be almost unwatchable."


=== Casting ===
Neeson auditioned as Schindler early on in the film's development. He was cast in December 1992 after Spielberg saw him perform in Anna Christie on Broadway. Warren Beatty participated in a script reading, but Spielberg was concerned that he could not disguise his accent and that he would bring "movie star baggage". Kevin Costner and Mel Gibson expressed interest in portraying Schindler, but Spielberg preferred to cast the relatively unknown Neeson so that the actor's star quality would not overpower the character. Neeson felt Schindler enjoyed outsmarting the Nazis, who regarded him as somewhat naïve. "They don't quite take him seriously, and he used that to full effect." To help him prepare for the role, Spielberg showed Neeson film clips of Time Warner CEO Steve Ross, who had a charisma that Spielberg compared to Schindler's. He also located a tape of Schindler speaking, which Neeson studied to learn the correct intonations and pitch.Fiennes was cast as Amon Göth after Spielberg viewed his performances in A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia and Emily Brontë's Wuthering Heights. Spielberg said of Fiennes' audition that "I saw sexual evil. It is all about subtlety: there were moments of kindness that would move across his eyes and then instantly run cold." Fiennes put on 28 pounds (13 kg) to play the role. He watched historic newsreels and talked to Holocaust survivors who knew Göth. In portraying him, Fiennes said "I got close to his pain. Inside him is a fractured, miserable human being. I feel split about him, sorry for him. He's like some dirty, battered doll I was given and that I came to feel peculiarly attached to." Doctors Samuel J. Leistedt and Paul Linkowski of the Université libre de Bruxelles describe Göth's character in the film as a classic psychopath. Fiennes looked so much like Göth in costume that when Mila Pfefferberg met him, she trembled with fear.The character of Itzhak Stern (played by Ben Kingsley) is a composite of the accountant Stern, factory manager Abraham Bankier, and Göth's personal secretary, Mietek Pemper. The character serves as Schindler's alter ego and conscience. Dustin Hoffman was offered the role but he refused it.Overall, there are 126 speaking parts in the film. Thousands of extras were hired during filming. Spielberg cast Israeli and Polish actors specially chosen for their Eastern European appearance. Many of the German actors were reluctant to don the SS uniform, but some of them later thanked Spielberg for the cathartic experience of performing in the movie. Halfway through the shoot, Spielberg conceived the epilogue, where 128 survivors pay their respects at Schindler's grave in Jerusalem. The producers scrambled to find the Schindlerjuden and fly them in to film the scene.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began on March 1, 1993, in Kraków, Poland, with a planned schedule of 75 days. The crew shot at or near the actual locations, though the Płaszów camp had to be reconstructed in a nearby abandoned quarry, as modern high rise apartments were visible from the site of the original camp. Interior shots of the enamelware factory in Kraków were filmed at a similar facility in Olkusz, while exterior shots and the scenes on the factory stairs were filmed at the actual factory. The production received permission from Polish authorities to film on the grounds of the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum, but objections to filming within the actual death camp were raised by the World Jewish Congress. To avoid filming inside the actual death camp, the film crew constructed a replica of a portion of the camp just outside the entrance of Birkenau.There were some antisemitic incidents. A woman who encountered Fiennes in his Nazi uniform told him: "The Germans were charming people. They didn't kill anybody who didn't deserve it." Antisemitic symbols were scrawled on billboards near shooting locations, while Kingsley nearly entered a brawl with an elderly German-speaking businessman who insulted the Israeli actor Michael Schneider. Nonetheless, Spielberg said that, at Passover, "all the German actors showed up. They put on yarmulkes and opened up Haggadas, and the Israeli actors moved right next to them and began explaining it to them. And this family of actors sat around and race and culture were just left behind."
I was hit in the face with my personal life. My upbringing. My Jewishness. The stories my grandparents told me about the Shoah. And Jewish life came pouring back into my heart. I cried all the time.
Shooting Schindler's List was deeply emotional for Spielberg, as the subject matter forced him to confront elements of his childhood, such as the antisemitism he faced. He was surprised that he did not cry while visiting Auschwitz; instead, he found himself filled with outrage. He was one of many crew members who could not force themselves to watch during the shooting of the scene where aging Jews are forced to run naked while being selected by Nazi doctors to go to Auschwitz. Spielberg commented that he felt more like a reporter than a film maker – he would set up scenes and then watch events unfold, almost as though he were witnessing them rather than creating a movie. Several actresses broke down when filming the shower scene, including one who was born in a concentration camp. Spielberg, his wife Kate Capshaw, and their five children rented a house in suburban Kraków for the duration of filming. He later thanked his wife "for rescuing me ninety-two days in a row ... when things just got too unbearable". Robin Williams called Spielberg to cheer him up, given the profound lack of humor on the set.Spielberg spent several hours each evening editing Jurassic Park, which was scheduled to premiere in June 1993.Spielberg occasionally used German and Polish language dialogue to create a sense of realism. He initially considered making the film entirely in those languages, but decided "there's too much safety in reading [subtitles]. It would have been an excuse [for the audience] to take their eyes off the screen and watch something else."


=== Cinematography ===
Influenced by the 1985 documentary film Shoah, Spielberg decided not to plan the film with storyboards, and to shoot it like a documentary. Forty percent of the film was shot with handheld cameras, and the modest budget meant the film was shot quickly over seventy-two days. Spielberg felt that this gave the film "a spontaneity, an edge, and it also serves the subject." He filmed without using Steadicams, elevated shots, or zoom lenses, "everything that for me might be considered a safety net." This matured Spielberg, who felt that in the past he had always been paying tribute to directors such as Cecil B. DeMille or David Lean.Spielberg decided to use black and white to match the feel of documentary footage of the era. Cinematographer Janusz Kamiński compared the effect to German Expressionism and Italian neorealism. Kamiński said that he wanted to give the impression of timelessness to the film, so the audience would "not have a sense of when it was made". Universal chairman Tom Pollock asked him to shoot the film on a color negative, to allow color VHS copies of the film to later be sold, but Spielberg did not want to accidentally "beautify events".


=== Music ===

John Williams, who frequently collaborates with Spielberg, composed the score for Schindler's List. The composer was amazed by the film, and felt it would be too challenging. He said to Spielberg, "You need a better composer than I am for this film." Spielberg responded, "I know. But they're all dead!" Itzhak Perlman performs the theme on the violin.In the scene where the ghetto is being liquidated by the Nazis, the folk song Oyfn Pripetshik (Yiddish: אויפֿן פּריפּעטשיק, 'On the Cooking Stove') is sung by a children's choir. The song was often sung by Spielberg's grandmother, Becky, to her grandchildren. The clarinet solos heard in the film were recorded by Klezmer virtuoso Giora Feidman. Williams won an Academy Award for Best Original Score for Schindler's List, his fifth win. Selections from the score were released on a soundtrack album.


== Themes and symbolism ==
The film explores the theme of good and evil, using as its main protagonist a "good German", a popular characterization in American cinema. While Göth is portrayed as an almost completely dark and evil person, Schindler gradually evolves from Nazi supporter to rescuer and hero. Thus a second theme of redemption is introduced as Schindler, a disreputable schemer on the edges of respectability, becomes a father figure responsible for saving the lives of more than a thousand people.


=== The girl in red ===
While the film is shot primarily in black and white, a red coat is used to distinguish a little girl in the scene depicting the liquidation of the Kraków ghetto. Later in the film, Schindler sees her exhumed dead body, recognizable only by the red coat she is still wearing. Spielberg said the scene was intended to symbolize how members of the highest levels of government in the United States knew the Holocaust was occurring, yet did nothing to stop it. He said: "It was as obvious as a little girl wearing a red coat, walking down the street, and yet nothing was done to bomb the German rail lines. Nothing was being done to slow down ... the annihilation of European Jewry. So that was my message in letting that scene be in color." Andy Patrizio of IGN notes that the point at which Schindler sees the girl's dead body is the point at which he changes, no longer seeing "the ash and soot of burning corpses piling up on his car as just an annoyance". Professor André H. Caron of the Université de Montréal wonders if the red symbolizes "innocence, hope or the red blood of the Jewish people being sacrificed in the horror of the Holocaust".The girl was portrayed by Oliwia Dąbrowska, three years old at the time of filming. Spielberg asked Dąbrowska not to watch the film until she was eighteen, but she watched it when she was eleven, and says she was "horrified". Upon seeing the film again as an adult, she was proud of the role she played. Roma Ligocka, who says she was known in the Kraków Ghetto for her red coat, feels the character might have been based on her. Ligocka, unlike her fictional counterpart, survived the Holocaust. After the film was released, she wrote and published her own story, The Girl in the Red Coat: A Memoir (2002, in translation). Alternatively, according to her relatives who were interviewed in 2014, the girl may have been inspired by Kraków resident Genya Gitel Chil.


=== Candles ===
The opening scene features a family observing Shabbat. Spielberg said that "to start the film with the candles being lit ... would be a rich bookend, to start the film with a normal Shabbat service before the juggernaut against the Jews begins". When the color fades out in the film's opening moments, it gives way to a world in which smoke comes to symbolize bodies being burnt at Auschwitz. Only at the end, when Schindler allows his workers to hold Shabbat services, do the images of candle fire regain their warmth through color. For Spielberg, they represent "just a glint of color, and a glimmer of hope." Sara Horowitz, director of the Koschitzky Centre for Jewish Studies at York University, sees the candles as a symbol for the Jews of Europe, killed and then burned in the crematoria. The two scenes bracket the Nazi era, marking its beginning and end. She points out that normally, the woman of the house lights the Sabbath candles. In the film, it is men who perform this ritual, demonstrating not only the subservient role of women, but also the subservient position of Jewish men in relation to Aryan men, especially Göth and Schindler.


=== Other symbolism ===
To Spielberg, the black and white presentation of the film came to represent the Holocaust itself: "The Holocaust was life without light. For me the symbol of life is color. That's why a film about the Holocaust has to be in black-and-white." Robert Gellately notes the film in its entirety can be seen as a metaphor for the Holocaust, with early sporadic violence increasing into a crescendo of death and destruction. He also notes a parallel between the situation of the Jews in the film and the debate in Nazi Germany between making use of the Jews for slave labor or exterminating them outright. Water is seen as giving deliverance by Alan Mintz, Holocaust Studies professor at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York. He notes its presence in the scene where Schindler arranges for a Holocaust train loaded with victims awaiting transport to be hosed down, and the scene in Auschwitz, where the women are given an actual shower instead of receiving the expected gassing.


== Release ==
Schindler's List opened in theatres on December 15, 1993, in the United States and December 25 in Canada. Its premiere in Germany was on March 1, 1994. Its U.S. network television premiere was on NBC on February 23, 1997. Shown uncut and without commercials, it ranked No. 3 for the week with a 20.9/31 rating/share, the highest Nielsen rating for any film since NBC's broadcast of Jurassic Park in May 1995. The film aired on public television in Israel on Holocaust Memorial Day in 1998.The DVD was released on March 9, 2004, in widescreen and full screen editions, on a double-sided disc with the feature film beginning on side A and continuing on side B. Special features include a documentary introduced by Spielberg. Also released for both formats was a limited edition gift set, which included the widescreen version of the film, Keneally's novel, the film's soundtrack on CD, a senitype, and a photo booklet titled Schindler's List: Images of the Steven Spielberg Film, all housed in a plexiglass case. The laserdisc gift set was a limited edition that included the soundtrack, the original novel, and an exclusive photo booklet. As part of its 20th anniversary, the film was released on Blu-ray Disc on March 5, 2013. The film was digitally remastered in 4K, Dolby Vision and Atmos and was reissued into theaters on December 7, 2018, for its 25th anniversary. The film was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray on December 18, 2018.Following the success of the film, Spielberg founded the Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation, a nonprofit organization with the goal of providing an archive for the filmed testimony of as many survivors of the Holocaust as possible, to save their stories. He continues to finance that work. Spielberg used proceeds from the film to finance several related documentaries, including Anne Frank Remembered (1995), The Lost Children of Berlin (1996), and The Last Days (1998).


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Schindler's List received acclaim from both film critics and audiences, with Americans such as talk show host Oprah Winfrey and President Bill Clinton urging others to see it. World leaders in many countries saw the film, and some met personally with Spielberg. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has received an approval rating of 98% based on 135 reviews, with an average rating of 9.20/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Schindler's List blends the abject horror of the Holocaust with Steven Spielberg's signature tender humanism to create the director's dramatic masterpiece." Metacritic gave the film a weighted average score of 95 out of 100, based on 30 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare average grade of "A+" on an A+ to F scale.Stephen Schiff of The New Yorker called it the best historical drama about the Holocaust, a film that "will take its place in cultural history and remain there." Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film four stars out of four and described it as Spielberg's best, "brilliantly acted, written, directed, and seen." Ebert named it one of his ten favorite films of 1993. Terrence Rafferty, also with The New Yorker, admired the film's "narrative boldness, visual audacity, and emotional directness." He noted the performances of Neeson, Fiennes, Kingsley, and Davidtz as warranting special praise, and calls the scene in the shower at Auschwitz "the most terrifying sequence ever filmed." In the 2013 edition of his Movie and Video Guide, Leonard Maltin awarded the picture a four-out-of-four-star rating; he described the movie as a "staggering adaptation of Thomas Keneally's best-seller ... with such frenzied pacing that it looks and feels like nothing Hollywood has ever made before ... Spielberg's most intense and personal film to date". James Verniere of the Boston Herald noted the film's restraint and lack of sensationalism, and called it a "major addition to the body of work about the Holocaust." In his review for The New York Review of Books, British critic John Gross said his misgivings that the story would be overly sentimentalized "were altogether misplaced. Spielberg shows a firm moral and emotional grasp of his material. The film is an outstanding achievement." Mintz notes that even the film's harshest critics admire the "visual brilliance" of the fifteen-minute segment depicting the liquidation of the Kraków ghetto. He describes the sequence as "realistic" and "stunning". He points out that the film has done much to increase Holocaust remembrance and awareness as the remaining survivors pass away, severing the last living links with the catastrophe. The film's release in Germany led to widespread discussion about why most Germans did not do more to help.Criticism of the film also appeared, mostly from academia rather than the popular press. Sara Horowitz points out that much of the Jewish activity seen in the ghetto consists of financial transactions such as lending money, trading on the black market, or hiding wealth, thus perpetuating a stereotypical view of Jewish life. Horowitz notes that while the depiction of women in the film accurately reflects Nazi ideology, the low status of women and the link between violence and sexuality is not explored further. History professor Omer Bartov of Brown University notes that the physically large and strongly drawn characters of Schindler and Göth overshadow the Jewish victims, who are depicted as small, scurrying, and frightened – a mere backdrop to the struggle of good versus evil.Horowitz points out that the film's dichotomy of absolute good versus absolute evil glosses over the fact that most Holocaust perpetrators were ordinary people; the movie does not explore how the average German rationalized their knowledge of or participation in the Holocaust. Author Jason Epstein commented that the movie gives the false impression that if people were smart enough or lucky enough, they could survive the Holocaust. Spielberg responded to criticism that Schindler's breakdown as he says farewell is too maudlin and even out of character by pointing out that the scene is needed to drive home the sense of loss and to allow the viewer an opportunity to mourn alongside the characters on the screen.Bartov wrote that the "positively repulsive kitsch of the last two scenes seriously undermines much of the film's previous merits". He describes the humanization of Schindler as "banal", and is critical of what he describes as the "Zionist closure" set to the song "Jerusalem of Gold".


=== Assessment by other filmmakers ===
Schindler's List was very well received by many of Spielberg's peers. Filmmaker Billy Wilder wrote to Spielberg saying, "They couldn't have gotten a better man. This movie is absolutely perfection." Polanski, who turned down the chance to direct the film, later commented, "I certainly wouldn't have done as good a job as Spielberg because I couldn't have been as objective as he was." He cited Schindler's List as an influence on his 1994 film Death and the Maiden. Martin Scorsese, who passed the film back to Spielberg and stated his version had different ideas from the final film including a different ending, would later comment "I admired the film greatly." The success of Schindler's List led filmmaker Stanley Kubrick to abandon his own Holocaust project, Aryan Papers, which would have been about a Jewish boy and his aunt who survive the war by sneaking through Poland while pretending to be Catholic. According to scriptwriter Frederic Raphael, when he suggested to Kubrick that Schindler's List was a good representation of the Holocaust, Kubrick commented, "Think that's about the Holocaust? That was about success, wasn't it? The Holocaust is about 6 million people who get killed. Schindler's List is about 600 who don't."Filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard accused Spielberg of using the film to make a profit out of a tragedy while Schindler's wife, Emilie Schindler, lived in poverty in Argentina. Keneally disputed claims that she was never paid for her contributions, "not least because I had recently sent Emilie a check myself." He also confirmed with Spielberg's office that payment had been sent from there. Filmmaker Michael Haneke criticized the sequence in which Schindler's women are accidentally sent off to Auschwitz and herded into showers: "There's a scene in that film when we don't know if there's gas or water coming out in the showers in the camp. You can only do something like that with a naive audience like in the United States. It's not an appropriate use of the form. Spielberg meant well – but it was dumb."Claude Lanzmann, the director of the nine-hour Holocaust documentary Shoah (1985), called Schindler's List a "kitschy melodrama" and a "deformation" of historical truth. "Fiction is a transgression, I am deeply convinced that there is a ban on depiction [of the Holocaust]", he said. Lanzmann also criticized Spielberg for viewing the Holocaust through the eyes of a German, saying "it is the world in reverse". He said: "I sincerely thought that there was a time before Shoah, and a time after Shoah, and that after Shoah certain things could no longer be done. Spielberg did them anyway."


=== Reaction of the Jewish community ===
At a 1994 Village Voice symposium about the film, historian Annette Insdorf described how her mother, a survivor of three concentration camps, felt gratitude that the Holocaust story was finally being told in a major film that would be widely viewed. Hungarian Jewish author Imre Kertész, a Holocaust survivor, feels it is impossible for life in a Nazi concentration camp to be accurately portrayed by anyone who did not experience it first-hand. While commending Spielberg for bringing the story to a wide audience, he found the film's final scene at the graveyard neglected the terrible after-effects of the experience on the survivors and implied that they came through emotionally unscathed. Rabbi Uri D. Herscher found the film an "appealing" and "uplifting" demonstration of humanitarianism. Norbert Friedman noted that, like many Holocaust survivors, he reacted with a feeling of solidarity towards Spielberg of a sort normally reserved for other survivors. Albert L. Lewis, Spielberg's childhood rabbi and teacher, described the movie as "Steven's gift to his mother, to his people, and in a sense to himself. Now he is a full human being."


=== Box office ===
The film grossed $96.1 million ($195 million in 2022 dollars) in the United States and Canada and over $321.2 million worldwide. In Germany, the film was viewed by over 100,000 people in its first week alone from 48 screens and was eventually shown in 500 theaters (including 80 paid for by municipal authorities), with a total of six million admissions and a gross of $38 million. Its 25th anniversary showings grossed $551,000 in 1,029 theaters.


=== Accolades ===
Spielberg won the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film for his work, and shared the Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture with co-producers Branko Lustig and Gerald R. Molen. Steven Zaillian won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay. The film also won the National Board of Review for Best Film, along with the National Society of Film Critics for Best Film, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor, and Best Cinematography. Awards from the New York Film Critics Circle were also won for Best Film, Best Supporting Actor, and Best Cinematographer. The Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarded the film for Best Film, Best Cinematography (tied with The Piano), and Best Production Design. The film also won numerous other awards and nominations worldwide.


== Controversies ==
In Malaysia, the film was initially banned, with the censors suggesting it seemed to be Jewish propaganda, informing the distributor that "the story reflects the privilege and virtues of a certain race only" and "It seems the illustration is propaganda with the purpose of asking for sympathy as well as to tarnish the other race." In the Philippines, chief censor Henrietta Mendez ordered cuts of three scenes depicting sexual intercourse and female nudity before the movie could be shown in cinemas. Spielberg refused, and pulled the film from screening in Philippine cinemas, which prompted the Senate to demand the abolition of the censorship board. President Fidel V. Ramos himself intervened, ruling that the movie could be shown uncut to anyone over the age of 15.According to Slovak filmmaker Juraj Herz, the scene in which a group of women confuse an actual shower with a gas chamber is taken directly, shot by shot, from his film Zastihla mě noc (The Night Overtakes Me, 1986). Herz wanted to sue, but was unable to fund the case.The song "Yerushalayim Shel Zahav" ("Jerusalem of Gold") is featured in the film's soundtrack and plays near the end of the film. This caused some controversy in Israel, as the song (which was written in 1967 by Naomi Shemer) is widely considered an informal anthem of the Israeli victory in the Six-Day War. In Israeli prints of the film, the song was replaced with "Halikha LeKesariya" ("A Walk to Caesarea") by Hannah Szenes, a World War II resistance fighter.For the 1997 American television showing, the film was broadcast virtually unedited. The telecast was the first to receive a TV-M (now TV-MA) rating under the TV Parental Guidelines that had been established earlier that year. Tom Coburn, then an Oklahoma congressman, said that in airing the film, NBC had brought television "to an all-time low, with full-frontal nudity, violence and profanity", adding that it was an insult to "decent-minded individuals everywhere". Under fire from both Republicans and Democrats, Coburn apologized, saying, "My intentions were good, but I've obviously made an error in judgment in how I've gone about saying what I wanted to say." He clarified his opinion, stating that the film ought to have been aired later at night when there would not be "large numbers of children watching without parental supervision".Controversy arose in Germany for the film's television premiere on ProSieben. Protests among the Jewish community ensued when the station intended to televise it with two commercial breaks of 3–4 minutes each. Ignatz Bubis, head of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, said: "It is problematic to interrupt such a movie by commercials". Jerzy Kanal, chairman of the Jewish Community of Berlin, added "It is obvious that the film could have a greater impact [on society] when broadcast unimpeded by commercials. The station has to do everything possible to broadcast the film without interruption." As a compromise, the broadcast included one break consisting of a short news update framed with commercials. ProSieben was also obliged to broadcast two accompanying documentaries to the film, showing "The daily lives of the Jews in Hebron and New York" prior to broadcast and "The survivors of the Holocaust" afterwards.


== Legacy ==
Schindler's List featured on a number of "best of" lists, including the TIME magazine's Top Hundred as selected by critics Richard Corliss and Richard Schickel, Time Out magazine's 100 Greatest Films Centenary Poll conducted in 1995, and Leonard Maltin's "100 Must See Movies of the Century". The Vatican named Schindler's List among the most important 45 films ever made. A Channel 4 poll named Schindler's List the ninth greatest film of all time, and it ranked fourth in their 2005 war films poll. The film was named the best of 1993 by critics such as James Berardinelli, Roger Ebert, and Gene Siskel. Deeming the film "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant", the Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry in 2004. The film was shown at the Berlinale Film Festival in February 2023, at which Spielberg received an honorary Golden Bear award.Due to the increased interest in Kraków created by the film, the city bought Oskar Schindler's Enamel Factory in 2007 to create a permanent exhibition about the German occupation of the city from 1939 to 1945. The museum opened in June 2010.


== See also ==
1993 in film
List of Holocaust films


== Notes ==


== References ==


== General sources ==


== External links ==

Schindler’s List essay  by Jay Carr at National Film Registry
Schindler's List at IMDb 
Schindler's List at the American Film Institute Catalog
Schindler's List at the TCM Movie Database
Schindler's List at Box Office Mojo
Schindler's List at AllMovie
Schindler's List at Rotten Tomatoes
Schindler's List at Metacritic 
The Shoah Foundation, founded by Steven Spielberg, preserves the testimonies of Holocaust survivors and witnesses
Through the Lens of History: Aerial Evidence for Schindler's List at Yad Vashem
Voices on Antisemitism Interview with Ralph Fiennes from the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
Voices on Antisemitism interview with Sir Ben Kingsley from the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
"Schindler's List: Myth, movie, and memory" (PDF). The Village Voice. March 29, 1994. pp. 24–31.12 Years a Slave (film)
1917 (2019 film)
1941 (film)
1993 in film
4K resolution
66th Academy Awards
A.I. Artificial Intelligence
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)
AFI's 10 Top 10
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Civil Action (film)
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Most Violent Year
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Prophet
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Star Is Born (2018 film)
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
About Schmidt
Abraham Bankier
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Awards
Ace Eli and Rodger of the Skies
Albert L. Lewis
Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the King's Men (2006 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Allan Starski
Almost Famous
Always (1989 film)
Amadeus (film)
Amarcord
Amazing Stories (1985 TV series)
Amazing Stories (2020 TV series)
Amblimation
Amblin'
Amblin Entertainment
Amblin Partners
Amblin Television
American Antiquarian Society
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Cinema Editors
American Film Institute
American Gangster (film)
American Hustle
American Sniper
American Splendor (film)
Amistad (film)
Amon Göth
Amour (2012 film)
Amy Irving
An American Tail: Fievel Goes West
An American in Paris (film)
An Officer and a Gentleman
Andrzej Seweryn
André H. Caron
Andy Nelson (sound engineer)
Anna B. Sheppard
Anna Christie
Anna Mucha
Anne Frank Remembered
Anne Spielberg
Anne of the Thousand Days
Annie Hall
Antisemitic
Apocalypse Now
Apollo 13 (film)
Argentina
Argo (2012 film)
Arnold Spielberg
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Aryan race
Atlantic City (1980 film)
Atonement (2007 film)
August Schmölzer
Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum
Auschwitz concentration camp
Avatar (2009 film)
Awakenings
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role
BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
BAFTA Award for Best Cinematography
BAFTA Award for Best Costume Design
BAFTA Award for Best Direction
BAFTA Award for Best Editing
BAFTA Award for Best Film
BAFTA Award for Best Film Music
BAFTA Award for Best Makeup and Hair
BAFTA Award for Best Production Design
BAFTA Award for Best Sound
Babe (film)
Babel (film)
Back to the Future
Ballad of a Soldier
Barbie (film)
Barry Lyndon
Basic Instinct
Beatrice Macola
Becket (1964 film)
Being John Malkovich
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Ben Kingsley
Berlin Wall
Berlinale Film Festival
Berliner Zeitung
Betrayal (1983 film)
Bibliography of works on Steven Spielberg
Bicycle Thieves
Bill Clinton
Billy Elliot
Billy Wilder
Biographical film
Birdman (film)
Black and white
Black market
Blood money (restitution)
Blowup
Blu-ray Disc
Blue Velvet (film)
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Boom Blox
Boom Blox Bash Party
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Boston Herald
Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Film
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Branko Lustig
Braveheart
Brazil (1985 film)
Breaking Away
Breaking the Waves
Brian De Palma
Bridge of Spies (film)
British Academy Film Awards
Brněnec
Broadcast News (film)
Broadway theatre
Brokeback Mountain
Brown University
Brünnlitz labor camp
Bugsy
Bull Durham
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
CBC News
CBS Interactive
CD
CODA (2021 film)
Cabaret (1972 film)
Call Me by Your Name (film)
Cannibal (Marcus Mumford song)
Cape Fear (1991 film)
Capital punishment
Capote (film)
Carol (film)
Caroline Goodall
Casablanca (film)
Catch Me If You Can
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Cecil B. DeMille
Central Council of Jews in Germany
Central European History
Channel 4
Chariots of Fire
Charles L. Campbell
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Film Critics Association
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Cinematography
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Director
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Screenplay
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor
Chicago Sun-Times
Chief executive officer
Chinatown (1974 film)
Christina Smith (make-up artist)
Cimarron (1931 film)
CinemaScore
Citizen Kane
Claire's Knee
Clarinet
Claude Lanzmann
Clear and Present Danger (film)
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Coming Home (1978 film)
Confessions of a Nazi Spy
Conversation Piece (film)
Cortes (miniseries)
Crash (2004 film)
Crematoria
Cries and Whispers
Crimes against humanity
Crimes and Misdemeanors
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon
Czechoslovakia
DVD
Da 5 Bloods
Dallas–Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Dancer in the Dark
Dances with Wolves
Darling (1965 film)
David Ansen
David Lean
Day for Night (film)
Days of Heaven
Dead Man Walking (film)
Dead Poets Society
Death and the Maiden (film)
Democratic Party (United States)
Destry Spielberg
Diana Reiter
Die Hard
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Distant Voices, Still Lives
Do the Right Thing
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Documentary film
Dog Day Afternoon
Doi (identifier)
Dolby Atmos
Dolby Vision
Double-sided disc
Dr. Strangelove
DreamWorks Animation
DreamWorks Pictures
DreamWorks Television
Drive My Car (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
Drugstore Cowboy
Duel (1971 film)
Dunkirk (2017 film)
Dustin Hoffman
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
East of Eden (film)
Educating Rita (film)
Elina Löwensohn
Elizabeth (film)
Embeth Davidtz
Emilie Schindler
Emily Brontë's Wuthering Heights
Empire of the Sun (film)
Entertainment Weekly
Epic film
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Ewa Braun
Exodus: Gods and Kings
Ezra Dagan
Fandango Media
Far from Heaven
Far from the Madding Crowd (1967 film)
Fargo (1996 film)
Fidel V. Ramos
Field of Dreams
Finding Neverland (film)
Firelight (1964 film)
First Cow
Five Easy Pieces
Flags of Our Fathers (film)
Forbidden Games
Forrest Gump
Four Weddings and a Funeral
Frederic Raphael
Friedrich von Thun
From Here to Eternity
Frozen (2013 film)
Gandhi (film)
Gangs of New York
Gene Siskel
Gentleman's Agreement
Gerald R. Molen
German Expressionism
Gervaise (film)
Get Out Your Handkerchiefs
Ghost (1990 film)
Gigi (1958 film)
Giora Feidman
Gladiator (2000 film)
Gods and Monsters (film)
Going My Way
Golden Bear
Golden Globe Award
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score
Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Golden Globe Awards
Gone with the Wind (film)
Good Night, and Good Luck
Good and evil
Goodbye to Language
Goodfellas
Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media
Gran Torino
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Gravity (2013 film)
Green Book (film)
Haggadah
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hanging
Hannah Szenes
Hannah and Her Sisters
Hannibal (2001 film)
Hans-Michael Rehberg
Henry V (1944 film)
Henryk Bista
Her (film)
High Incident
High Noon
Historical drama
History of Jews in Poland
History of the Jews in Poland
Holocaust denial
Holocaust survivors
Holocaust trains
Holy See
Hook (film)
Hoop Dreams
Hope and Glory (film)
House of Games
House of Hummingbird
Houston Post
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Howard Koch (screenwriter)
Howards End (film)
Hugo (film)
Hungarian Jews
IGN
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
Ian Freer
If Beale Street Could Talk (film)
Ignatz Bubis
Il Postino: The Postman
Imre Kertész
In Which We Serve
In the Bedroom
In the Heat of the Night (film)
Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade
Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom
Inside Llewyn Davis
Invasion America
It Happened One Night
Italian neorealism
Itzhak Perlman
Itzhak Stern
JFK (film)
JSTOR (identifier)
Jack the Bear
James Berardinelli
Janet Maslin
Janusz Kamiński
Japan Academy Film Prize
Japan Academy Film Prize for Outstanding Foreign Language Film
Jason Epstein
Jaws (film)
Jean-Luc Godard
Jean de Florette
Jerusalem of Gold
Jerzy Nowak
Jessica Capshaw
Jewish Theological Seminary of America
Jochen Nickel
John Gross
John J. McCusker
John Williams
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Joker (2019 film)
Jonathan Sagall
Josef Leipold
Josef Mengele
Joseph Bau
Joseph McBride (writer)
Journal of Communication
Judy Alexander Cory
Julia (1977 film)
Julian Scherner
Julius Caesar (1953 film)
Julius Madritsch
Juraj Herz
Jurassic Park (film)
Kate Capshaw
Kevin Costner
Killers of the Flower Moon (film)
Kippah
Klezmer
Kraków
Kraków-Płaszów concentration camp
Kraków Ghetto
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kurt Luedtke
L.A. 2017
L.A. Confidential (film)
La La Land
La Ronde (1950 film)
Lacombe, Lucien
Lady Bird (film)
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leaving Las Vegas
Leo Rosner
Leonard Maltin
Leonard Maltin's Movie Guide
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Letters from Iwo Jima
Liam Neeson
Library of Congress
Licorice Pizza
Life Is Sweet (film)
Liliane Weissberg
Lincoln (film)
List of Holocaust films
List of awards and nominations received by Steven Spielberg
List of films considered the best
Little Dorrit (1987 film)
Little Miss Sunshine
Little Women (2019 film)
London Film Critics' Circle Award for Film of the Year
Los Angeles Film Critics Association
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Cinematography
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Los Angeles Times
Love Story (1970 film)
Ludger Pistor
M*A*S*H (film)
Macbeth (1971 film)
Mad Max: Fury Road
Maestro (2023 film)
Malaysia
Malcolm X (1992 film)
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Mark Ivanir
Martin Scorsese
Marty (film)
Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World
Matthew Mungle
Małgorzata Gebel
Medal of Honor: Allied Assault
Medal of Honor: Underground
Medal of Honor (1999 video game)
Mel Gibson
Melancholia (2011 film)
Melvin and Howard
Memoirs of a Geisha (film)
Metacritic
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Michael Haneke
Michael Kahn (film editor)
Midnight Cowboy
Midnight Express (film)
Mietek Pemper
Milk (2008 American film)
Million Dollar Baby
Minority Report (film)
Miri Fabian
Missing (1982 film)
Mission: Impossible (film)
Mississippi Burning
Moneyball (film)
Monsieur Verdoux
Monster's Ball
Moonlight (2016 film)
Mother (2009 film)
Moulin Rouge!
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mrs. Miniver
Mulholland Drive (film)
Munich (2005 film)
Music Corporation of America
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Left Foot
Mystic River (film)
NBC
Naomi Shemer
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review
National Board of Review Award for Best Film
National Film Registry
National Society of Film Critics
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Cinematography
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Director
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Film
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actor
Nazi Germany
Nazi Party
Nazi concentration camps
Neo-Nazism
Network (1976 film)
New York Film Critics Circle
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Cinematographer
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actor
Newsreel
Newsweek
Nielsen ratings
Night Gallery (film)
Night Must Fall (1937 film)
Nikkan Sports Film Award for Best Foreign Film
No Country for Old Men
No Time to Die
Nomadland
None but the Lonely Heart (film)
Nonprofit organization
Norbert Weisser
Oklahoma
Oliver! (film)
Olkusz
Omer Bartov
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Waterfront
Once Upon a Time in America
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Oprah Winfrey
Ordinary People
Original camera negative
Oskar Schindler
Oskar Schindler's Enamel Factory
Out of Africa (film)
Out of Sight
Oyfn Pripetshik
PMID (identifier)
Paisan
Pan's Labyrinth
Parasite (2019 film)
Paris, Texas (film)
Passover
Patton (film)
Paul Cronin
Paweł Deląg
Persona (1966 film)
Phantom Thread
Philippines
Piotr Polk
Pixote
Platoon (film)
Poldek Pfefferberg
Poltergeist (1982 film)
President of the Philippines
Principal photography
Prizzi's Honor
ProSieben
Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture
Psychopath
Pulp Fiction
Question 7
Quills (film)
Quiz Show (film)
Raging Bull
Raiders of the Lost Ark
Rain Man
Ralph Fiennes
Rami Heuberger
Ran (film)
Ready Player One (film)
Rebecca (1940 film)
Red Army
Reds (film)
Reissue
Remaster
Republican Party (United States)
Return to Seoul
Reuters
Richard Corliss
Richard III (1955 film)
Richard Schickel
Ripley (TV series)
Robin Williams
Rocky
Roger Ebert
Roma (2018 film)
Roma Ligocka
Roman Polanski
Ron Judkins
Room at the Top (1959 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Rudolf Höss
S2CID (identifier)
Sarnia Observer
Sasha Spielberg
Savage (1973 TV film)
Saving Private Ryan
Scenes from a Marriage
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's Ark
Schindler's List (disambiguation)
Schindler's List (soundtrack)
Schindlerjuden
Schutzstaffel
Scott Millan
Searching for Bobby Fischer
Secrets & Lies (film)
Senate of the Philippines
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Sexual intercourse
Shabbat
Shakespeare in Love
Shame (1968 film)
Shine (film)
Shoah (film)
Sideways
Sidney Sheinberg
Six-Day War
Slavery
Slipstream (unfinished film)
Slovaks
Slumdog Millionaire
Small Axe (anthology)
Something Evil
Sons and Lovers (film)
Spartacus (film)
Special edition
Speed (1994 film)
Spielberg's After Dark
Spielberg (film)
Spotlight (film)
Stanley Kubrick
Star Wars (film)
Steadicam
Stephen Schiff
Steve Pederson (sound engineer)
Steve Ross (Time Warner CEO)
Steven Spielberg
Steven Spielberg's Director's Chair
Steven Spielberg's unrealized projects
Steven Spielberg Jewish Film Archive
Steven Spielberg filmography
Steven Zaillian
Storyboard
Stranger Than Paradise
Sully (film)
Sunday Bloody Sunday (film)
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Super 8 (2011 film)
Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation
Svitavy
Sydney Pollack
TV-MA
TV Parental Guidelines
Talmud
Terms of Endearment
Terrence Rafferty
TheGuardian.com
The Accidental Tourist (film)
The Adventures of Tintin (film)
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The BFG (2016 film)
The Banshees of Inisherin
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Big Short (film)
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Cardinal
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Color Purple (2023 film)
The Commitments (film)
The Conversation
The Crying Game
The Daily Telegraph
The Dark Knight
The Dead (1987 film)
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Departed
The Descendants
The Dig (video game)
The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story
The Elephant Man (film)
The English Patient (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The Falcon and the Snowman
The French Connection (film)
The Full Monty
The Girl in the Red Coat
The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo (2011 film)
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Goonies
The Graduate
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Holdovers
The Hollywood Reporter
The Holocaust
The Hours (film)
The Hundred-Foot Journey (film)
The Hurt Locker
The Hustler
The Independent
The Informer (1935 film)
The Insider (film)
The Interpreter (2005 film)
The Intouchables
The Irishman
The Killing Fields (film)
The King's Speech
The King of Comedy (film)
The Last Days
The Last Emperor
The Last Samurai
The Last Samurai (film)
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Lost World: Jurassic Park
The New York Review of Books
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Night Of
The Night of the Shooting Stars
The Nun's Story (film)
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Ox-Bow Incident
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Piano
The Player (1992 film)
The Post (film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Purple Rose of Cairo
The Queen (2006 film)
The Quiet Man
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Rider (film)
The Robe (film)
The Seattle Times
The Shape of Water
The Shawshank Redemption
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Sixth Sense
The Social Network
The Son's Room
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sound Barrier
The Sound of Music (film)
The Sting
The Sugarland Express
The Terminal
The Tin Drum (film)
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Tree of Life (film)
The True Glory
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Unbearable Lightness of Being (film)
The Village Voice
The Wages of Fear
The Wrestler (2008 film)
The Zone of Interest (film)
Thelma & Louise
There Will Be Blood
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
Thomas Keneally
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Three Kings (1999 film)
Time (magazine)
Time Out (magazine)
Time Warner
Titanic (1997 film)
Tom Coburn
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tootsie
Top Gun: Maverick
Topaze (1933 American film)
Topsy-Turvy
Traffic (2000 film)
Trainspotting (film)
Turner Classic Movies
Twilight Zone: The Movie
Tár
USC Shoah Foundation
Ultra HD Blu-ray
Unforgiven
United 93 (film)
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
Universal Pictures
Université de Montréal
Université libre de Bruxelles
Untersturmführer
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Uri D. Herscher
Variety (magazine)
Village Voice
Vitreous enamel
WALL-E
Waltz with Bashir
War Horse (film)
War of the Worlds (2005 film)
Warren Beatty
Wartime Lies
Washington, D.C.
Watch on the Rhine
Wehrmacht
Weighted average
West Side Story (1961 film)
West Side Story (2021 film)
Whiplash (2014 film)
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (film)
Wings (1927 film)
Wojciech Klata
World Jewish Congress
World War II
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Wuthering Heights (1939 film)
Yad Vashem
Yale Journal of Criticism
Yi Yi
Yiddish language
Yom HaShoah
York University
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Z (1969 film)
Zero Dark Thirty
Zionist
Zoom lens
http://www.lafca.net/years/1993.html
http://www.channel4.com/film/newsfeatures/microsites/G/greatest/results/zxyzres_01.html
http://www.channel4.com/film/newsfeatures/microsites/W/greatest_warfilms/results/5-1.html
http://www.afi.com/100years/movies.aspx
http://www.afi.com/100years/cheers.aspx
http://www.afi.com/100years/movies10.aspx
http://www.afi.com/10top10/category.aspx?cat=10
http://www.theobserver.ca/2013/03/05/red-coat-girl-traumatized-by-schindlers-list
http://www.jewishjournal.com/arts/article/stanley_kubricks_unrealized_vision_20050826/
http://www.decentfilms.com/articles/vaticanfilmlist
http://alumnus.caltech.edu/~ejohnson/critics/siskel.html#y1993
http://www.kinoeye.org/02/01/kosulicova01.php
http://www.giorafeidman-online.com/en/biography
http://www.newyorker.com/arts/reviews/film/schindlers_list_spielberg
http://www.insidefilm.com/spielberg.html
http://www.goldenglobes.org/browse/?param=/film/24901
http://www.cnn.com/US/9702/26/schindler.debate/
http://www.metacritic.com/movie/schindlers-list
http://sfi.usc.edu/
http://www.yadvashem.org/yv/en/exhibitions/our_collections/schindlers_list/index.asp?WT.mc_id=wiki
http://writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/Schindlers-List-symposium_Village-Voice_03-29-94.pdf
http://www.chicagofilmcritics.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=49&Itemid=59
http://sensesofcinema.com/2003/steven-spielberg/spielberg_symposium_films_and_moments/
http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,980191,00.html
http://www.phil.uu.nl/~rob/2007/hum291/lanzmannschindler.shtml
http://www.mottineiger.com/image/users/171194/ftp/my_files/Prime%20Time%20Commemoration-Final.pdf
http://pavotravel.com/how-schindlers-list-changed-krakow/
http://awards.bafta.org/keyword-search?keywords=schindlers+list
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1994
https://web.archive.org/web/20070613183536/http://www.newyorker.com/arts/reviews/film/schindlers_list_spielberg
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/schindlers_list/
https://www.nytimes.com/1993/12/16/movies/new-york-critics-honor-schindler-s-list.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110429072543/http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/66th-winners.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080609053034/http://www.channel4.com/film/newsfeatures/microsites/G/greatest/results/zxyzres_01.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20050518030204/http://channel4.com/film/newsfeatures/microsites/W/greatest_warfilms/results/5-1.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20131029191528/http://www.goldenglobes.org/browse/?param=/film/24901
https://web.archive.org/web/20071011191648/http://cnn.com/US/9702/26/schindler.debate/
http://preview.reelviews.net/comment/123193.html
http://www.berliner-zeitung.de/gemischte-reaktionen-juedischer-gemeinden-auf-geplante-unterbrechung-von--schindlers-liste---mehr-wirkung-ohne-werbung--16035490
https://web.archive.org/web/20081224185523/http://www.berlinonline.de/berliner-zeitung/archiv/.bin/dump.fcgi/1997/0221/none/0068/index.html
https://www.amazon.com/SCHINDLERS-LIST-BOX-Laserdisc-Edition/dp/B003Z2YAR4
https://www.amazon.com/Schindlers-List-Blu-ray-Digital-UltraViolet/dp/B00B0U2SEA/ref=sr_1_2?s=movies-tv&ie=UTF8&qid=1382910338&sr=1-2&keywords=schindler's+list
https://www.amazon.com/Schindlers-List-Widescreen-Edition-Neeson/dp/B00012QM8G
https://www.amazon.com/Schindlers-List-Collectors-Gift-Set/dp/B00012QM9K
http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/schindlers-list-1970-3
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v119912
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0108052/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/why-cinemascore-matters-box-office-225563
https://web.archive.org/web/20140416175418/https://chicagofilmcritics.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=49&Itemid=59
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/schindlers-list-1993
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/in-praise-of-love-2002
https://www.today.com/popculture/man-behind-music-star-wars-wbna7749339
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/michael-kahn-michael-brown-receive-97149
https://web.archive.org/web/20131017083704/http://www.jewishjournal.com/arts/article/stanley_kubricks_unrealized_vision_20050826/
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1994/02/03/hollywood-and-the-holocaust/
https://www.timeout.com/london/film/michael-haneke-discusses-the-white-ribbon-1
https://www.loc.gov/item/prn-04-215/films-added-to-national-film-registry-for-2004/2004-12-28/
https://nationalsocietyoffilmcritics.com/about-2/
https://www.producersguild.org/page/PGA_Award_19902010
https://www.thewrap.com/steven-zaillian-receive-wga-laurel-award-24032/
https://xnet.ynet.co.il/win/articles/0,14717,L-3105549,00.html
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1994/03/21/seriously-spielberg
https://www.americanradiohistory.com/Archive-BC/BC-1997/BC-1997-03-03.pdf
https://www.allmusic.com/album/schindlers-list-mw0000645380
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=schindlerslist.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/schindlers_list
https://ew.com/movies/2018/08/29/schindlers-list-returning-theaters-25th-anniversary/
https://www.afi.com/100years/movies10.aspx
https://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Schindlers-List-4K-Blu-ray/207135/
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX4157802
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb13320928c
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4361605-7
http://katalog.nsk.hr/F/?func=direct&doc_number=000397560&local_base=nsk10
https://www.idref.fr/035364904
https://viaf.org/viaf/177903653
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb13320928c
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/8578020/Mietek-Pemper.html
https://archive.org/details/stevenspielbergb00mcbr
https://archive.org/details/makingofschindle00palo
https://www.minneapolisfed.org/about-us/monetary-policy/inflation-calculator/consumer-price-index-1800-
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/steven-spielberg-schindlers-list-25th-anniversary-jurassic-park-martin-scorsese-a8655561.html
https://archive.org/details/completespielber0000free/page/220
https://www.newsweek.com/spielbergs-obsession-190602
https://web.archive.org/web/20200307192140/https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/34008848/Imre_Kertesz__Who_Owns_Auschwitz__Translated_by_John_MacKay.pdf?response-content-disposition=inline%3B%20filename%3DImre_Kertesz_Who_Owns_Auschwitz_Translat.pdf&X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Credential=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A/20200307/us-east-1/s3/aws4_request&X-Amz-Date=20200307T192121Z&X-Amz-Expires=3600&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&X-Amz-Signature=cb91b0cd0385b6f37b6788815cf34b81986b5bdfc6ad7fc513267f1340084b1c
https://www.nytimes.com/1993/01/17/us/jews-try-to-halt-auschwitz-filming.html
https://www.loc.gov/static/programs/national-film-preservation-board/documents/schindlers_list.pdf
https://www.ctvnews.ca/entertainment/ralph-tops-box-office-again-aquaman-is-a-hit-in-china-1.4211000
https://archive.seattletimes.com/archive/?date=19940309&slug=1899178
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1997-02-25-ca-32141-story.html
https://www.filmsite.org/timemagazinegreats.html
https://www.rogerebert.com/roger-ebert/the-best-10-movies-of-1993
https://www.nybooks.com/articles/1994/04/21/a-dissent-on-schindlers-list/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180326224559/http://www.phil.uu.nl/~rob/2007/hum291/lanzmannschindler.shtml
https://www.filmsite.org/maltin2.html
https://www.ign.com/articles/2004/03/10/schindlers-list
https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-1997-02-26-9702270115-story.html
https://ew.com/article/1994/01/21/liam-neeson-joins-list-after-schindlers-list/
https://www.cbc.ca/news/arts/spielberg-earns-11th-directors-guild-nomination-1.1376761
https://ew.com/article/1994/01/21/spielberg-and-schindlers-list-how-it-came-together/
https://www.filmsite.org/timeoutC.html
https://www.ushmm.org/antisemitism/podcast/voices-on-antisemitism/ralph-fiennes
https://www.ushmm.org/antisemitism/podcast/voices-on-antisemitism/sir-ben-kingsley
https://web.archive.org/web/20190804021144/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/handv100.pdf#page=1&zoom=auto,-76,346
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/handv100.pdf#page=1&zoom=auto,-76,346
http://www.afi.com:80/Docs/100Years/quotes400.pdf#page=78&zoom=auto,-76,632
https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/34008848/Imre_Kertesz__Who_Owns_Auschwitz__Translated_by_John_MacKay.pdf?response-content-disposition=inline%3B%20filename%3DImre_Kertesz_Who_Owns_Auschwitz_Translat.pdf&X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Credential=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A/20200307/us-east-1/s3/aws4_request&X-Amz-Date=20200307T192121Z&X-Amz-Expires=3600&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&X-Amz-Signature=cb91b0cd0385b6f37b6788815cf34b81986b5bdfc6ad7fc513267f1340084b1c
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q483941#identifiers
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:145532698
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14413385
https://variety.com/1994/film/news/malaysian-schindler-ban-may-be-reviewed-119653/
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0108052/?ref_=bo_se_r_1
https://authority.bibsys.no/authority/rest/authorities/html/90968789
https://web.archive.org/web/20210416194848/https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0108052/?ref_=bo_se_r_1
https://web.archive.org/web/20190519213359/http://afi.com/100years/movies10.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20200412212753/https://www.nytimes.com/1993/01/17/us/jews-try-to-halt-auschwitz-filming.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180829194206/https://ew.com/movies/2018/08/29/schindlers-list-returning-theaters-25th-anniversary/
https://web.archive.org/web/20181108184754/https://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Schindlers-List-4K-Blu-ray/207135/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210227232024/http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/schindlers_list
https://web.archive.org/web/20200714130847/https://www.metacritic.com/movie/schindlers-list
https://web.archive.org/web/20140426043610/http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/why-cinemascore-matters-box-office-225563
https://web.archive.org/web/20130726094518/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/8578020/Mietek-Pemper.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200806212914/https://www.ctvnews.ca/entertainment/ralph-tops-box-office-again-aquaman-is-a-hit-in-china-1.4211000
https://web.archive.org/web/20160304040500/http://www.lafca.net/years/1993.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20150529012109/http://www.afi.com/100Years/movies.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20110313150620/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/quotes400.pdf#page=78&zoom=auto,-76,632
https://web.archive.org/web/20160308093713/http://www.afi.com/100Years/cheers.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20150607064632/http://www.afi.com/100years/movies10.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20100701074755/http://www.afi.com/10top10/category.aspx?cat=10
https://web.archive.org/web/20200612004500/https://www.newsweek.com/spielbergs-obsession-190602
https://web.archive.org/web/20150402152840/http://awards.bafta.org/keyword-search?keywords=schindlers+list
https://web.archive.org/web/20170201074036/http://preview.reelviews.net/comment/123193.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200612004403/https://archive.seattletimes.com/archive/?date=19940309&slug=1899178
https://web.archive.org/web/20171015044806/http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/schindlers-list-1970-3
https://web.archive.org/web/20141023025939/http://sensesofcinema.com/2003/steven-spielberg/spielberg_symposium_films_and_moments/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200612004500/https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1997-02-25-ca-32141-story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20141109082154/http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,980191,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130818213016/http://www.filmsite.org/timemagazinegreats.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702175937/https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/schindlers-list-1993
https://web.archive.org/web/20201113211249/https://www.rogerebert.com/roger-ebert/the-best-10-movies-of-1993
https://web.archive.org/web/20181030115331/https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/in-praise-of-love-2002
https://web.archive.org/web/20200804021902/https://www.nybooks.com/articles/1994/04/21/a-dissent-on-schindlers-list/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702175731/https://www.today.com/popculture/man-behind-music-star-wars-wbna7749339
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702180131/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/michael-kahn-michael-brown-receive-97149
https://web.archive.org/web/20141210102020/http://www.theobserver.ca/2013/03/05/red-coat-girl-traumatized-by-schindlers-list
https://web.archive.org/web/20131018050826/http://www.decentfilms.com/articles/vaticanfilmlist
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702180036/http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1994/02/03/hollywood-and-the-holocaust/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702204337/https://www.timeout.com/london/film/michael-haneke-discusses-the-white-ribbon-1
https://web.archive.org/web/20151127054504/http://alumnus.caltech.edu/~ejohnson/critics/siskel.html#y1993
https://web.archive.org/web/20210225121125/http://www.kinoeye.org/02/01/kosulicova01.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20200407183706/https://www.loc.gov/item/prn-04-215/films-added-to-national-film-registry-for-2004/2004-12-28/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200530233014/https://www.filmsite.org/maltin2.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20201123122652/https://www.nytimes.com/1993/12/16/movies/new-york-critics-honor-schindler-s-list.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20131029200448/http://www.giorafeidman-online.com/en/biography
https://web.archive.org/web/20200927020548/http://www.mottineiger.com/image/users/171194/ftp/my_files/Prime%20Time%20Commemoration-Final.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20170729100021/https://nationalsocietyoffilmcritics.com/about-2/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200612004500/https://www.ign.com/articles/2004/03/10/schindlers-list
https://web.archive.org/web/20190628210258/https://www.producersguild.org/page/PGA_Award_19902010
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702180136/https://www.thewrap.com/steven-zaillian-receive-wga-laurel-award-24032/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200316025815/https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/steven-spielberg-schindlers-list-25th-anniversary-jurassic-park-martin-scorsese-a8655561.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702180043/https://xnet.ynet.co.il/win/articles/0,14717,L-3105549,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20081024060256/http://www.insidefilm.com/spielberg.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702175837/https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1994/03/21/seriously-spielberg
https://web.archive.org/web/20210308202136/https://www.amazon.com/SCHINDLERS-LIST-BOX-Laserdisc-Edition/dp/B003Z2YAR4
https://web.archive.org/web/20210308035921/https://www.amazon.com/Schindlers-List-Blu-ray-Digital-UltraViolet/dp/B00B0U2SEA/ref=sr_1_2?s=movies-tv&ie=UTF8&qid=1382910338&sr=1-2&keywords=schindler's+list
https://web.archive.org/web/20210315211938/https://www.amazon.com/Schindlers-List-Widescreen-Edition-Neeson/dp/B00012QM8G
https://web.archive.org/web/20131104111835/http://www.amazon.com/Schindlers-List-Collectors-Gift-Set/dp/B00012QM9K
https://web.archive.org/web/20200612004500/https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-1997-02-26-9702270115-story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20150211201311/http://pavotravel.com/how-schindlers-list-changed-krakow/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210516205040/https://variety.com/1994/film/news/malaysian-schindler-ban-may-be-reviewed-119653/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200612010004/https://ew.com/article/1994/01/21/liam-neeson-joins-list-after-schindlers-list/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210516205040/https://worldradiohistory.com/Archive-BC/BC-1997/BC-1997-03-03.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20180702180140/https://www.allmusic.com/album/schindlers-list-mw0000645380
https://web.archive.org/web/20200902040242/https://www.cbc.ca/news/arts/spielberg-earns-11th-directors-guild-nomination-1.1376761
https://web.archive.org/web/20200528214820/https://ew.com/article/1994/01/21/spielberg-and-schindlers-list-how-it-came-together/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200807000316/https://www.filmsite.org/timeoutC.html
https://www.americanantiquarian.org/proceedings/44517778.pdf
https://www.americanantiquarian.org/proceedings/44525121.pdf
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/14/dustin-hoffman-interview-simon-hattenstone
http://www.today.com/video/dustin-hoffman-on-fear-of-success-why-he-turned-down-schindlers-list-609043011893
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007267602405171
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058517118806706
https://aleph.nkp.cz/F/?func=find-c&local_base=aut&ccl_term=ica=unn2013758235&CON_LNG=ENG
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/89238/enwp
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/67172
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:146698805
https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0008938900009419
https://www.jstor.org/stable/4546374
https://doi.org/10.1353%2Fyale.2001.0010
https://doi.org/10.1111%2F1556-4029.12359
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24329037
https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1460-2466.2009.01424.x
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0021-9916
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/n95031476
https://deadline.com/2023/05/martin-scorsese-interview-killers-of-the-flower-moon-leonardo-dicaprio-robert-de-niro-1235359006/
https://www.flickr.com/photos/152059321@N07/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210308052156/https://www.flickr.com/photos/152059321@N07/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q483941#P1712
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/schindlers-list
https://dbn.bn.org.pl/descriptor-details/9810612230005606
https://web.archive.org/web/20210823233451/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/14/dustin-hoffman-interview-simon-hattenstone
https://web.archive.org/web/20211021094430/https://www.today.com/video/dustin-hoffman-on-fear-of-success-why-he-turned-down-schindlers-list-609043011893
https://web.archive.org/web/20230520221259/https://deadline.com/2023/05/martin-scorsese-interview-killers-of-the-flower-moon-leonardo-dicaprio-robert-de-niro-1235359006/
https://www.screendaily.com/news/steven-spielberg-delivers-memorable-berlin-speech-read-the-full-transcript/5179550.article
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q483941#P345
