Separate Tables (film)
Separate Tables is a 1958 American drama film starring Rita Hayworth, Deborah Kerr, David Niven, Burt Lancaster, and Wendy Hiller, based on two one-act plays by Terence Rattigan that were collectively known by this name. Niven and Hiller won Academy Awards for Best Actor and Best Supporting Actress respectively for their performances. The picture was directed by Delbert Mann and adapted for the screen by Rattigan, John Gay and an uncredited John Michael Hayes. Mary Grant and Edith Head designed the film's costumes.


== Plot ==
The film is set in the Hotel Beauregard in Bournemouth on the south coast of England.  Major David Angus Pollock (David Niven) tries but fails to hide an article about himself in the West Hampshire Weekly News. His attempt to keep the article from the eyes of the other guests at the residential hotel only succeeds in heightening their awareness of it, particularly the strict Mrs Railton-Bell (Gladys Cooper) and the more relaxed and compassionate Lady Matheson (Cathleen Nesbitt). The two women read in the paper that Major Pollock has pled guilty to sexually harassing several young women in a theatre. However the filed complaints are, in themselves, questionable. Mrs Railton-Bell wants Major Pollock expelled from the hotel and holds a meeting with other long-term residents to decide the issue before presenting it to the manager, Miss Pat Cooper (Wendy Hiller). Mrs Railton-Bell leads the meeting arguing for the Major's expulsion, and despite the opposing views of the other residents, she informs Miss Cooper that the Major must leave.
Anne (Rita Hayworth) and John (Burt Lancaster), who were formerly married to one another, meet outside. Anne coolly teases John, informing him that she is engaged; John tells her he is engaged as well, but does not disclose that he is engaged to Miss Cooper. John claims that though Anne could have married other men who were wealthier and more important, she chose him, a man in a lower economic class, in order to manipulate and degrade him fully. Despite this, John and Anne admit they are still attracted to each other. She asks him to come to her room.
As they walk into the hotel, Miss Cooper tells Anne she has a phone call. Miss Cooper asks John, knowing Anne is his ex-wife, to consider the real reason for Anne's visit. John defends Anne at first, claiming that all his misfortunes are his own fault, but changes his mind when Miss Cooper tells him that Anne is talking on the phone to his publisher, the only person who knows that John and Miss Cooper are engaged. John confronts Anne in her bedroom. When she attempts to seduce him, he cruelly tells her that, in the light, he can see that she has aged and without her physical beauty it will be impossible for her to continue to manipulate people. She begs him to stay, but he runs out of the hotel after striking her. Anne has an emotional breakdown, and Miss Cooper comforts her. Anne reveals that she is not really engaged and has been abusing sleeping pills to ease her pain, even during the day.
The next morning, Mrs Railton-Bell's downtrodden daughter Sibyl (Deborah Kerr) tells Major Pollock that she knows what he did. He explains that he always has been fearful of people and that it is easier for him to attempt to be familiar with strangers. Major Pollock tells Sibyl that he and she get along well with each other because they are both afraid of life. As he returns to his room to pack, Sibyl worries he will not find a new home.
When John returns in the morning, Miss Cooper tells him that Anne is emotionally unwell, and asks him to see her before she checks out of the hotel. After John leaves, Miss Cooper attempts to persuade Major Pollock to stay, but he refuses. The hotel residents eat their breakfast at separate tables in the dining room. John and Anne appear to reconcile, but they do not know if they can ever be happy, together or apart.
When Major Pollock enters the room, there is an awkward silence until John greets him. The others do the same and cheerfully converse with him. Mrs Railton-Bell is angered by this and demands Sibyl leave with her. Sibyl refuses to obey her mother's command for the first time ever, and insists on remaining to finish her breakfast. After her mother leaves, she starts to talk to Major Pollock, who decides to stay on at the hotel.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
The film took the two plays and opened them to create a screenplay that introduced some new parts, and stars Rita Hayworth, Deborah Kerr, David Niven, Wendy Hiller, Burt Lancaster, and May Hallatt, who already played Miss Meacham on stage. Variety wrote "Rattigan and John Gay have masterfully blended the two playlets into one literate and absorbing full-length film." The film was nominated for seven Oscars, Best Picture, Best Actress (Kerr), Best Writing, Adapted Screenplay, Best Cinematography (Black and White), and Best Dramatic or Comedy Score, and won two (Niven for Best Actor and Hiller for Best Supporting Actress).Top billing was divided between Deborah Kerr and Rita Hayworth: Hayworth was billed above Kerr in the posters while Kerr was billed above Hayworth in the film itself, a practice followed by James Stewart and John Wayne four years later for The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance and later by Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman in All the President's Men (1976).
Burt Lancaster was also co-producer (Clifton Productions, a subsidiary of Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Productions). Rita Hayworth was married to James Hill at the time.Rod Taylor agreed to play a small part in the film because of the quality of the production.


== Reception ==


=== Critical Reception ===
Separate Tables encountered a complex reception upon its release. Despite the allure of its star-studded cast, the film faced uncertainty regarding its commercial success due to the narrative's downbeat nature and its divergence from the conventional notions of escapist entertainment. Margaret Hinxman of Picturegoer called the film "a four-star crusade against type-casting." She wrote: "It's almost as if in Separate Tables David Niven, Deborah Kerr, Burt Lancaster, Rita Hayworth are deliberately setting out to pillory the "types" that made them famous." She praised the film as "an absorbing study of human relationships." Jack Moffit of The Hollywood Reporter claimed it would require an audience with a "finer, more selective" taste since "the film qualifies itself to the exacting literary requirements of important tragedy." He added: "It may be hard to sell this to the moviegoing public, but it is eminently worth selling." Variety claimed the story was "bolstered by some of the best performances of the year" and praised the film's producers as deserving credit "for undertaking a story that does not meet the conception of what is generally considered sure-fire material in today's market."


== Awards and nominations ==
David Niven won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role, setting the current record for the shortest performance to win the award.


== Home media ==
Separate Tables was released to DVD by MGM Home Video on December 11, 2001, as a Region 1 widescreen DVD and by Kino Lorber (under license from MGM) to Blu-ray on July 29, 2014.


== References ==


== External links ==
Separate Tables at IMDb
Separate Tables at AllMovie
Separate Tables at Rotten Tomatoes11th Writers Guild of America Awards
16th Golden Globe Awards
1958 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
31st Academy Awards
A Bequest to the Nation
A Death in California
A Gathering of Eagles
A Girl Named Sooner
A Tale of Two Cities (1935 play)
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Academy Awards
Adventure Story (1961 TV play)
Adventure Story (play)
After the Dance (play)
Against Her Will: An Incident in Baltimore
AllMovie
All Quiet on the Western Front (1979 film)
All on Her Own
All the President's Men (film)
All the Way Home (1981 film)
Apache (film)
April Morning (film)
Audrey Dalton
Before Dawn (play)
Bequest to the Nation (film)
Billing (performing arts)
Birch Interval
Birdman of Alcatraz (film)
Bond Street (film)
Bournemouth
Breaking Up (1978 film)
Brighton Rock (1948 film)
Brontë (film)
Bryna Productions
Brynaprod
Burt Lancaster
Burt Lancaster filmography
CBS Playhouse
Calyork Music
Calyork Records
Cathleen Nesbitt
Cause Célèbre (play)
Charles Lang
Clifton Productions
Colby Music
Columbia Pictures
Cry Tough (film)
Curtleigh Productions
David Copperfield (1969 film)
David Niven
David Raksin
David di Donatello
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Actress
Dear Heart
Deborah Kerr
Delbert Mann
Desire Under the Elms (film)
Drama film
DuPont Show of the Month
Dustin Hoffman
Edith Head
English Without Tears
Felix Aylmer
First Episode
Fitzwilly
Flare Path
Follow My Leader
Ford Star Jubilee
Francis Gary Powers: The True Story of the U-2 Spy Incident
Frank Ross Productions
French Without Tears
French Without Tears (film)
George Glass
Gilbert Kurland
Gladys Cooper
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture
Goodbye, Mr. Chips (1969 film)
Goodyear Television Playhouse
Grey Farm
Gypsy (1937 film)
Halburt Productions
Harlequinade (Rattigan)
Harold Adamson
Harold Hecht
Harold Hecht Productions
Harold Hecht filmography
Harry Kleiner
Harry Warren
Heart to Heart (TV play)
Hecht-Hill-Lancaster
Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Films
Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Productions
Hecht-Lancaster & Buzzell Music
Hecht-Lancaster Productions
Hecht & Buzzell Music
Heidi (1968 film)
His Majesty O'Keefe
Home to Stay
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
In Praise of Love (play)
Incident in a Small Town
Ironclads (film)
James Hill (American film producer)
James Stewart
Jane Eyre (1970 film)
Joe Hyams
John Gay (screenwriter)
John Michael Hayes
John Wayne
Joie de Vivre (musical)
Kidnapped (1971 film)
Kiss the Blood Off My Hands
Laurel Awards
Leigh Music
Lights Out (radio show)
Lily in Winter
Loring Buzzell
Love's Dark Ride
Love In Idleness
Love Leads the Way: A True Story
Lover Come Back (1961 film)
Lu Ann Simms
Maine Records
Man and Boy (play)
Marjorie Fowler
Marty (film)
Mary Grant Price
Maxwell Arnow
May Hallatt
Middle of the Night
Mister Buddwing
NBC Sunday Showcase
Nat Perrin
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Awards 1958
Nelson (1966 film)
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Screenplay
Night Crossing
No Place to Run (film)
Norlan Productions
Norma Productions
Omnibus (American TV program)
Picturegoer
Playhouse 90
Playwrights '56
Priscilla Morgan
ProQuest (identifier)
Producers' Showcase
Quick, Before It Melts
Quiet Wedding
Rita Hayworth
Robert Redford
Rod Taylor
Ross (play)
Rotten Tomatoes
Run Silent, Run Deep (film)
Sant Jordi Awards
Separate Tables
She Waits
Startime (1959 TV series)
Summer of the Seventeenth Doll (1959 film)
Sweet Smell of Success
Sweet Smell of Success (soundtrack)
Take a Giant Step
Tell Me My Name
Ten Tall Men
Terence Rattigan
That Touch of Mink
The Bachelor Party
The Belles of St. Clements
The Browning Version (1951 film)
The Browning Version (1994 film)
The Browning Version (play)
The Crimson Pirate
The Dark at the Top of the Stairs (film)
The Day Will Dawn
The Deep Blue Sea (1955 film)
The Deep Blue Sea (2011 film)
The Deep Blue Sea (play)
The Devil's Disciple (1959 film)
The Final Test
The First Time (1952 film)
The First Woman President
The Flame and the Arrow
The Gift of Love: A Christmas Story
The Girl Who Came to Supper
The Hollywood Reporter
The Kentuckian (1955 film)
The Last Days of Patton
The Legendary Curse of the Hope Diamond
The Man Who Loved Redheads
The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance
The Man Without a Country (1973 film)
The Member of the Wedding (1982 film)
The Outsider (1961 film)
The Philco Television Playhouse
The Pink Jungle
The Prince and the Showgirl
The Rabbit Trap
The Sleeping Prince (play)
The Sound Barrier
The Ted Kennedy Jr. Story
The Unforgiven (1960 film)
The V.I.P.s (film)
The Way to the Stars
The Winslow Boy
The Winslow Boy (1948 film)
The Winslow Boy (1999 film)
The Yellow Rolls-Royce
The Young Savages
Thou Shalt Not Commit Adultery
To Find My Son
Tom and Joann
Torn Between Two Lovers (film)
Trapeze (film)
Turner Classic Movies
Uncensored (film)
United Artists
United Productions of America
Universal-International Pictures
Universal Pictures
Variation on a Theme (play)
Variety (magazine)
Vera Cruz (film)
Walter Seltzer
Warner Brothers Pictures
Wendy Hiller
While the Sun Shines
While the Sun Shines (play)
Who Is Sylvia? (play)
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written Drama
http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/20965/Separate-Tables/awards.html
https://viaf.org/viaf/233965362
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v43734
http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/20965/Separate-Tables/articles.html
https://d-nb.info/gnd/7842863-4
https://variety.com/1957/film/reviews/separate-tables-2-1117794749/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0052182/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1018587-separate_tables
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1520037#identifiers
http://www.goldderby.com/feature/best-actor-oscar-winners-shortest-performance-record-1203945798/amp/
http://www.boxofficestory.com/france-1959-c22750235/1
https://www.proquest.com/docview/2338266676
https://search.proquest.com/docview/2338266676
https://www.proquest.com/docview/1014809767
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1014809767
