Since You Went Away
Since You Went Away is a 1944 American epic drama film directed by John Cromwell for Selznick International Pictures and distributed by United Artists. It is an epic about the American home front during World War II that was adapted and produced by David O. Selznick from the 1943 novel Since You Went Away: Letters to a Soldier from His Wife by Margaret Buell Wilder. The music score was by Max Steiner, and the cinematography by Stanley Cortez, Lee Garmes, George Barnes (uncredited), and Robert Bruce (uncredited).
The film is set in a mid-sized American town, where people with loved ones in the armed forces try to cope with their changed circumstances and make their own contributions to the war effort. The town is near a military base, and some of the characters are troops serving Stateside.
Though sentimental in places, Since You Went Away is somber at times about the effects of war on ordinary people. Some characters on the home front are dealing with grief, loneliness, or fear for the future. Wounded and disabled troops are shown in the hospital scenes.


== Plot ==
"This is a story of the Unconquerable Fortress: the American Home...1943" In January 1943, Anne Hilton is an upper-middle-class housewife living in a Midwestern town near a military base with her two teenage daughters, Jane and Bridget ("Brig"). Anne's beloved husband Tim Hilton has volunteered for U.S. Army service in World War II. Anne has just returned from seeing her husband off to Camp Claiborne, and she and her daughters must adjust to Tim's absence and make other sacrifices for the war effort, including food rationing; planting a victory garden; giving up the services of their loyal maid Fidelia who nevertheless offers to continue working part-time for the Hiltons while foregoing wages; and taking in a boarder, the curmudgeonly retired Colonel Smollett. When the Hiltons travel by train in a failed attempt to see Tim one last time before he ships out, they encounter or travel with many other people whose lives have been affected by the war, and they end up not getting to see Tim because their train is delayed to allow a defense supply train to go through first. In contrast, the Hiltons' socialite neighbor Emily Hawkins complains about the inconveniences caused by the war and engages in unsupportive behaviors such as hoarding food and criticizing the Hiltons' efforts.
The Colonel has a strained relationship with his young grandson, Bill Smollett, because Bill dropped out of West Point and is now serving in the U.S. Army as a mere corporal rather than an officer. An old friend of Anne and Tim's, U.S. Navy Lieutenant Tony Willett, also visits the Hiltons while awaiting his orders. Bill quickly falls for Jane, who has a crush on Tony, who in turn has long been attracted to Anne. However, after Tony leaves, Bill and Jane's relationship slowly develops and they fall in love. They become engaged, but Bill convinces Jane to wait until after the war to get married. Bill finally is sent overseas and Jane tearfully runs after his departing train to tell him goodbye. The Colonel, who under his gruff exterior really does care about his grandson, conveys his good wishes to Bill via Anne, but arrives too late to say goodbye in person.
Jane is determined to do more for the war effort and begins volunteering as a nurses' aide at the nearby military hospital, where returning veterans with physical and mental injuries are sent to recover. The family learns via telegram that Tim Hilton is missing in action in the Southwest Pacific. Shortly after Bill's departure, the Hiltons receive word that he was killed in action at Salerno. The Hiltons and the Colonel grieve together for Bill. Jane and Anne finally tell off Emily Hawkins after Emily suggests that it is unseemly for Jane to volunteer at the hospital, and Anne decides she herself must do more to help and trains as a welder for defense work at the shipyard.
Tony returns on leave and talks to Anne about his feelings for her, but she believes that he only keeps her as a romantic ideal because she is married to his friend Tim and therefore unattainable. Anne and Tony decide to leave things as they are and remain friends. On Christmas Eve, Fidelia places gifts under the tree that Tim had given her months earlier to leave for his family, and Anne is moved to tears. Anne then gets a cablegram by telephone informing her that Tim is safe and is coming home, and she and her daughters joyfully embrace. "Be of good courage, and He shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord."


== Cast ==
Jennifer Jones and Robert Walker played young sweethearts in the film, but in real life they were married at the time and going through a break-up. They divorced not long after the film was completed (Jones married Selznick after his marriage to Irene Mayer Selznick ended).


== Reception ==
According to The New York Times critic Bosley Crowther, Since You Went Away features a script with an "excess of exhausting emotional detail"; Crowther was impressed with the performances, but had issues with the film as a whole:
As the mother and center of the family, Claudette Colbert gives an excellent show of gallantly self-contained emotion, and Jennifer Jones is surpassingly sweet as a well-bred American daughter in the first bloom of womanhood and love. Robert Walker is uncommonly appealing as the young soldier whom she tragically adores, and Shirley Temple, now grown to "teen-age freshness", is pert as the young sister. Monty Woolley makes a full-blown character of the man who comes to lodge; Joseph Cotten is droll as the Navy playboy, and Hattie McDaniel does an Andy-act quite well... No doubt, this would have been a sharper picture if Mr. Selznick had played it in much less time, and it would have been considerably more significant had he kept it somewhat closer to average means. Two hours and fifty-one minutes is a lot of time to harp upon one well-known theme -lonesomeness and anxiety. And that is all this picture really does.
Literary critic Manny Farber, writing in The New Republic registers this appraisal:

 Since You Went Away holds religiously to a philosophy consisting in the ideas that only happy, virtuous or funny things happen in the American home, that only the pretty and the brave live there, that any complications should be more than balanced by happy rewards…As a whole, the picture is doughy and inconsequential as the bread you get in the grocery store…For its length, this is as ineffectual a movie as I ever saw.”
The movie was successful and earned $4,950,000 in North American rentals during its theatrical release, and over $7 million in rentals overall.


== Accolades ==
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:

2006: AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers – Nominated


== Home media ==
Since You Went Away was released to DVD by MGM Home Video on October 19, 2004, in a Region 1 fullscreened DVD. It was later released on Blu-ray by Kino Classics on November 21, 2017.


== In popular culture ==
The farewell scene between Jones and Walker at the railway station was parodied in the film Airplane! (1980).


== References ==


== Sources ==
Farber, Manny. 2009. Farber on Film: The Complete Film Writings of Manny Farber. Edited by Robert Polito. Library of America. ISBN 978-1-59853-050-6


== External links ==
Since You Went Away at IMDb 
Since You Went Away at AllMovie 
Since You Went Away at Rotten Tomatoes
Since You Went Away at the TCM Movie Database
Since You Went Away at the American Film Institute Catalog17th Academy Awards
A.S.C.
AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Bill of Divorcement (1932 film)
A Farewell to Arms (1957 film)
A Matter of Morals
A Star Is Born (1937 film)
A Tale of Two Cities (1935 film)
Abe Lincoln in Illinois (film)
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Adeline De Walt Reynolds
Agnes Moorehead
Airplane!
Albert Basserman
Algiers (film)
AllMovie
American Film Institute
American home front during World War II
Andrew V. McLaglen
Ann Vickers (film)
Anna Karenina (1935 film)
Anna and the King of Siam (film)
Banjo on My Knee (film)
Betrayal (1929 film)
Bosley Crowther
Butterfly McQueen
Byron Foulger
Caged (1950 film)
Camp Claiborne
Chinatown Nights (1929 film)
Christopher Strong
Claudette Colbert
Close Harmony (1929 film)
Colonel (United States)
Corporal
Craig Stevens (actor)
Dancing Lady
David Copperfield (1935 film)
David O. Selznick
David O. Selznick filmography
Dead Reckoning (1947 film)
Dinner at Eight (1933 film)
Dorothy Dandridge
Double Harness
Drama (film and television)
Duel in the Sun (film)
Edwin Maxwell (actor)
Epic film
For the Defense (1930 film)
Forgotten Faces (1928 film)
George Barnes (cinematographer)
George Chandler
Gone to Earth (film)
Gone with the Wind (film)
Gordon Oliver
Guy Madison
Hal C. Kern
Hattie McDaniel
Hell's Highway (1932 film)
I'll Be Seeing You (1944 film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Dream Too Much (1935 film)
In Name Only
Intermezzo (1939 film)
Irene Mayer Selznick
Jackie Moran
Jalna (film)
James E. Newcom
Jennifer Jones
John Cromwell (director)
Joseph Cotten
Keenan Wynn
Lee Garmes
Library of America
Lieutenant (navy)
Lieutenant Commander
Light's Diamond Jubilee
Lionel Barrymore
Little Lord Fauntleroy (1936 film)
Lloyd Corrigan
Made for Each Other (1939 film)
Manhattan Melodrama
Manny Farber
Max Steiner
Meet the Baron
Midwestern United States
Monty Woolley
Nazimova
Night Flight (1933 film)
Night Song (1948 film)
Nothing Sacred (film)
OCLC (identifier)
Of Human Bondage (1934 film)
Our Betters
Portrait of Jennie
Rebecca (1940 film)
Reckless (1935 film)
Reward Unlimited
Rhonda Fleming
Rich Man's Folly
Robert Polito
Robert Walker (actor, born 1918)
Rockabye (1932 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Roulette (1924 film)
Ruth Roman
Salerno landings
Scandal Sheet (1931 film)
Selznick International Pictures
Shirley Temple
Since You Went Away (disambiguation)
So Ends Our Night
Son of Fury: The Story of Benjamin Blake
Spellbound (1945 film)
Spitfire (1934 film)
Stanley Cortez
Street of Chance (1930 film)
Sweepings
Terminal Station (film)
Terry Moore (actress)
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1938 film)
The Animal Kingdom (1932 film)
The Company She Keeps
The Dance of Life
The Enchanted Cottage (1945 film)
The Fountain (1934 film)
The Four Feathers (1929 film)
The Garden of Allah (1936 film)
The Goddess (1958 film)
The Man I Love (1929 film)
The Mighty (1929 film)
The New Republic
The New York Times
The Paradine Case
The Prisoner of Zenda (1937 film)
The Racket (1951 film)
The Scavengers (1959 film)
The Silver Cord (film)
The Texan (1930 film)
The Third Man
The Vice Squad
The World and the Flesh
The Young in Heart
This Man Is Mine (1934 film)
To Mary – with Love
Tom Sawyer (1930 film)
Topaze (1933 American film)
Turner Classic Movies
Unfaithful (1931 film)
United Artists
United States Marine Corps
United States Military Academy
Vanessa: Her Love Story
Vanguard Films
Victory (1940 film)
Victory garden
Village Tale
Viva Villa!
Wallis Clark
Warren Hymer
Welder
What Price Hollywood?
World War II
http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/90225/Since-You-Went-Away/full-credits.html
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1945
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/cheers300.pdf
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=940CE7D8143EE03BBC4951DFB166838F659EDE
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/1397161
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v44824
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0037280/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/24166
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1620639#P1562
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/since_you_went_away
https://www.nytimes.com/1944/07/21/archives/since-you-went-away-a-film-of-wartime-domestic-life-with-claudette.html
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/90225/enwp
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1620639#P345
