Star Wars (film)
Star Wars (retroactively retitled Star Wars: Episode IV – A New Hope) is a 1977 American epic space opera film written and directed by George Lucas, produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century-Fox. It was the first film released in the Star Wars film series and the fourth chronological chapter of the "Skywalker Saga". Set "a long time ago" in a fictional universe where the galaxy is ruled by the tyrannical Galactic Empire, the story focuses on a group of freedom fighters known as the Rebel Alliance, who aim to destroy the Empire's newest weapon, the Death Star. When Rebel leader Princess Leia is apprehended by the Empire, Luke Skywalker acquires stolen architectural plans of the Death Star and sets out to rescue her while learning the ways of a metaphysical power known as "the Force" from Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi. The cast includes Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Peter Cushing, Alec Guinness, David Prowse, James Earl Jones, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, and Peter Mayhew.
Lucas had the idea for a science-fiction film in the vein of Flash Gordon around the time he completed his first film, THX 1138 (1971), and began working on a treatment after the release of American Graffiti (1973). After numerous rewrites, filming took place throughout 1975 and 1976 in locations including Tunisia and Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire, England. The film suffered production difficulties; the cast and crew involved believed the film would be a failure. Lucas formed the visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic to help create the film's special effects. It also went $3 million over budget due to delays.
Few were confident in the film's box office prospects. It was released in a small number of theaters in the United States on May 25, 1977, and quickly became a surprise blockbuster hit, leading to it being expanded to a much wider release. The film opened to critical acclaim, particularly for its special effects. It grossed $410 million worldwide during its initial run, surpassing Jaws (1975) to become the highest-grossing film until the release of E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982); subsequent releases brought its total gross to $775 million. When adjusted for inflation, Star Wars is the second-highest-grossing film in North America (behind Gone with the Wind) and the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time. It received numerous awards at the Academy Awards, BAFTA Awards, and Saturn Awards, among others. The film has been reissued many times with Lucas's support—most significantly with its 20th-anniversary theatrical "Special Edition"—incorporating many changes including modified computer-generated effects, altered dialogue, re-edited shots, remixed soundtracks and added scenes.
Often regarded as one of the greatest and most influential films ever made, the film became a pop-cultural phenomenon, launching an industry of tie-in products, including novels, comics, video games, amusement park attractions and merchandise including toys, games, and clothing. It became one of the first 25 films selected by the United States Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry in 1989, while its soundtrack was added to the U.S. National Recording Registry in 2004. The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983) followed Star Wars, rounding out the original Star Wars trilogy. A prequel and a sequel trilogy have since been released, in addition to two anthology films and various television series.


== Plot ==

Amid a galactic civil war, Rebel Alliance spies have stolen plans  to the tyrannical Galactic Empire's Death Star, a massive space station capable of destroying entire planets. Imperial Senator Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan, secretly one of the Rebellion's leaders, has obtained its schematics, but her ship is intercepted by an Imperial Star Destroyer under the command of the ruthless Darth Vader. Before she is captured, Leia hides the plans in the memory system of astromech droid R2-D2, who flees in an escape pod to the nearby desert planet Tatooine alongside his companion, protocol droid C-3PO.
The droids are captured by Jawa traders, who sell them to moisture farmers Owen and Beru Lars, the guardians of their nephew, Luke Skywalker. While Luke is cleaning R2-D2, he discovers a holographic recording of Leia requesting help from a former ally named Obi-Wan Kenobi. Later, R2-D2 goes missing, and while searching for him, Luke is attacked by scavenging Sand People. Luke is rescued by Obi-Wan, an aged hermit. Obi-Wan tells Luke of his days as one of the Jedi Knights, former peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic, who drew mystical abilities from a metaphysical energy field known as the Force, but were hunted to near-extinction by the Empire. Luke learns that his father fought alongside Obi-Wan as a Jedi Knight during the Clone Wars until Vader, Obi-Wan's former pupil, turned to the dark side of the Force and murdered him. Obi-Wan offers Luke his father's old lightsaber, the signature weapon of the Jedi.
R2-D2 plays Leia's full message, in which she begs Obi-Wan to take the Death Star plans to Alderaan and give them to her father, a fellow veteran, for analysis. Although Luke initially declines Obi-Wan's offer to accompany him to Alderaan and learn the ways of the Force, he is left with no choice after discovering that Imperial stormtroopers have killed his aunt and uncle and destroyed their farm in their search for the droids. Traveling to a cantina in Mos Eisley to search for transport, Luke and Obi-Wan hire Han Solo, a smuggler indebted to local mobster Jabba the Hutt. Pursued by stormtroopers, Obi-Wan, Luke, R2-D2, and C-3PO flee Tatooine with Han and his Wookiee copilot, Chewbacca, on their ship, the Millennium Falcon.
Before the Falcon can reach Alderaan, Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin destroys the planet after interrogating Leia for the location of the Rebel Alliance's base. Upon arrival, the Falcon is captured by the Death Star's tractor beam, but the group evades capture by hiding in the ship's smuggling compartments. As Obi-Wan leaves to disable the tractor beam, Luke persuades Han and Chewbacca to help him rescue Leia after discovering that she is scheduled to be executed. After disabling the tractor beam, Obi-Wan sacrifices himself in a lightsaber duel against Vader, allowing the rest of the group to escape the Death Star with Leia. Using a tracking device, the Empire tracks the Falcon to the hidden Rebel base on Yavin IV.
The schematics reveal a hidden weakness in the Death Star's thermal exhaust port, which could allow the Rebels to trigger a chain reaction in its main reactor with a precise proton torpedo strike. Han leaves the Rebels to pay off Jabba, after collecting his reward for rescuing Leia. Luke joins their X-wing starfighter squadron in a desperate attack against the approaching Death Star. In the ensuing battle, the Rebels suffer heavy losses as Vader leads a squadron of TIE fighters against them. Han and Chewbacca unexpectedly return to aid them in the Falcon, and knock Vader's ship off course before he can shoot Luke down. Guided by the voice of Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke uses the Force to aim his torpedoes into the exhaust port, destroying the Death Star moments before it fires on the Rebel base. In a triumphant ceremony at the base, Leia awards Luke and Han medals for their heroism.


== Cast ==

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker: A young adult raised by his aunt and uncle on Tatooine, who dreams of something more than his current life and learns about the Force and the Jedi. Lucas favored casting young actors who lacked long experience. To play Luke (then known as Luke Starkiller), Lucas sought actors who could project intelligence and integrity. While reading the script, Hamill found the dialogue to be extremely odd because of its universe-embedded concepts. He chose to simply read it sincerely, and he was cast instead of William Katt, who was subsequently cast in Brian De Palma's Carrie (Lucas shared a joint casting session with De Palma, a longtime friend). Robby Benson, Will Seltzer, Charles Martin Smith and Kurt Russell also auditioned for the role.
Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A cynical smuggler and captain of the Millennium Falcon. Lucas initially rejected casting Ford for the role, as he "wanted new faces"; Ford had previously worked with Lucas on American Graffiti. Instead, Lucas asked Ford to assist in the auditions by reading lines with the other actors and explaining the concepts and history behind the scenes that they were reading. Lucas was eventually won over by Ford's portrayal and cast him instead of Kurt Russell, Nick Nolte, Sylvester Stallone, Bill Murray, Christopher Walken, Burt Reynolds, Jack Nicholson, James Caan, Robert De Niro, Kelsey Grammer, Al Pacino, Steve Martin, Chevy Chase, or Perry King (who later played Han Solo in the radio plays).
Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia Organa: The princess of the planet Alderaan who is a member of the Imperial Senate and, secretly, one of the leaders of the Rebel Alliance. Many young Hollywood actresses auditioned for the role of Princess Leia, including Amy Irving, Terri Nunn, Cindy Williams, Linda Purl, Karen Allen, and Jodie Foster. Koo Stark was considered but ended up getting the role of Camie Marstrap, Luke Skywalker's friend, a character that did not make the final cut of the film. Fisher was cast under the condition that she lose 10 pounds (4.5 kg) for the role.
Peter Cushing as Grand Moff Tarkin: The commander of the Death Star. Lucas originally offered the role to Christopher Lee but he declined. Lucas originally had Cushing in mind for the role of Obi-Wan Kenobi, but Lucas believed that "his lean features" would be better employed in the role of Tarkin instead. Lucas commended Cushing's performance, saying "[He] is a very good actor. Adored and idolized by young people and by people who go to see a certain kind of movie. I feel he will be fondly remembered for the next 350 years at least." Cushing, commenting on his role, joked: "I've often wondered what a 'Grand Moff' was. It sounds like something that flew out of a cupboard."
Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi: An aging Jedi Master and veteran of the Clone Wars who introduces Luke to the Force. Lucas's decision to cast "unknowns" was not taken favorably by his friend Francis Ford Coppola and the studio, so Lucas decided Obi-Wan Kenobi should be played by an established actor. Producer Gary Kurtz said, "The Alec Guinness role required a certain stability and gravitas as a character... which meant we needed a very, very strong character actor to play that part." Before Guinness was cast, Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune (who starred in many Akira Kurosawa films) was considered for the role. According to Mifune's daughter, Mika Kitagawa, her father turned down Lucas' offers to play Kenobi and Darth Vader because "he was concerned about how the film would look and that it would cheapen the image of samurai... At the time, sci-fi movies still looked quite cheap as the effects were not advanced and he had a lot of samurai pride." Guinness was one of the few cast members who believed that the film would be successful; he negotiated a deal for 2.25% of the one-fifth gross royalties paid to Lucas, which made him quite wealthy in later life. He agreed to take the part of Kenobi on the condition that he would not have to do any publicity to promote the film. Lucas credited him with inspiring the cast and crew to work harder, saying that Guinness contributed significantly to the completion of the filming. Harrison Ford said, "It was, for me, fascinating to watch Alec Guinness. He was always prepared, always professional, always very kind to the other actors. He had a very clear head about how to serve the story."
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A protocol droid affiliated with the Rebellion who is "fluent in over six million forms of communication". Daniels auditioned for and was cast as C-3PO; he has said that he wanted the role after he saw a Ralph McQuarrie drawing of the character and was struck by the vulnerability in the robot's face. Initially, Lucas did not intend to use Daniels' voice for C-3PO. Thirty well-established voice actors read for the voice of the droid. According to Daniels, one of the major voice actors, believed by some sources to be Stan Freberg, recommended Daniels' voice for the role. Mel Blanc was considered for the role, but according to Daniels, Blanc told Lucas that Daniels was better for the part. Richard Dreyfuss was also considered.
Kenny Baker as R2-D2: An astromech droid and C-3PO's companion, who is carrying the Death Star plans and a secret message for Obi-Wan from Princess Leia. When filming was under way in London, where additional casting took place, Baker, performing a musical comedy act with his acting partner Jack Purvis, learned that the film crew was looking for a small person to fit inside a robot suit and maneuver it. Baker, who was 3 feet 8 inches (1.12 m) tall, was cast immediately after meeting George Lucas. He said, "He saw me come in and said 'He'll do' because I was the smallest guy they'd seen up until then." He initially turned down the role three times, hesitant to appear in a film where his face would not be shown and hoping to continue the success of his comedy act, which had recently started to be televised. R2-D2's recognizable beeps and squeaks were made by sound designer Ben Burtt imitating "baby noises", recording this voice as it was heard on an intercom, and creating the final mix using a synthesizer.
Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca: A Wookiee, Han Solo's sidekick, and first mate of the Millennium Falcon. Mayhew learned of a casting call for Star Wars, which was being shot in London, and decided to audition. The 7-foot-3-inch (2.21 m) tall actor was immediately cast as Chewbacca after he stood up to greet Lucas. He recounted, "I sat down on one of the sofas, waiting for George. Door opened, and George walked in with Gary behind him. So, naturally, what did I do? I'm raised in England. Soon as someone comes in through the door, I stand up. George goes 'Hmm [looked up].' Virtually turned to Gary, and said 'I think we've found him.' Mayhew originally auditioned for Darth Vader, but David Prowse was cast instead. Mayhew modeled his performance of Chewbacca after the mannerisms of animals he saw at public zoos.
David Prowse as Darth Vader: Obi-Wan's former Jedi apprentice, who fell to the dark side of the Force. Prowse was originally offered the role of Chewbacca, but turned it down as he wanted to play the villain instead. Lucas dismissed Prowse for the character's voice due to his West Country English accent, which led to him being nicknamed "Darth Farmer" by the other cast members.
James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader; he was uncredited until 1983. Lucas originally considered for Orson Welles to voice the character after dismissing Prowse. However, Lucas was too concerned that Welles' voice would be too familiar to audiences, he instead cast then-relatively less recognizable Jones.Other actors include Phil Brown and Shelagh Fraser as Luke's Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru; Jack Purvis, Kenny Baker's partner in his London comedy act, as the Chief Jawa in the film; and Eddie Byrne as Vanden Willard, a Rebel general. Denis Lawson and Garrick Hagon played rebel pilots Wedge Antilles and Biggs Darklighter (Luke's childhood friend), respectively. Don Henderson and Leslie Schofield appear as Imperial Generals Cassio Tagge and Moradmin Bast, respectively, and Richard LeParmentier plays Admiral Motti. Alex McCrindle portrays General Jan Dodonna, Alfie Curtis portrays Dr. Evazan, and Peter Geddis portrays Captain Raymus Antilles. Michael Leader plays a minor role as a Stormtrooper known for accidentally hitting his helmet against a door. Heavily synthesised audio recordings of John Wayne from earlier films were used as the voice of the Imperial spy Garindan. Robert Clarke appears as Imperial officer Wulff Yularen and Patrick Jordan plays another Imperial officer, Siward Cass.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Lucas had the idea for a space fantasy film in 1971, after he completed directing his first full-length feature, THX 1138. Originally, Lucas wanted to adapt the Flash Gordon space adventure comics and serials into his own films, having been fascinated by them since he was young. He later said:

I especially loved the Flash Gordon serials ... Of course I realize now how crude and badly done they were ... loving them that much when they were so awful, I began to wonder what would happen if they were done really well.

At the Cannes Film Festival following the completion of THX 1138, Lucas pushed towards buying the Flash Gordon rights, but they were already tied-up with Dino De Laurentiis. Lucas later recounted:

I wanted to make a Flash Gordon movie, with all the trimmings, but I couldn't obtain the rights to the characters. So I began researching and went right back and found where Alex Raymond (who had done the original Flash Gordon comic strips in newspapers) had got his idea from. I discovered that he'd got his inspiration from the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs (author of Tarzan) and especially from his John Carter of Mars series books. I read through that series, then found that what had sparked Burroughs off was a science fantasy called Gulliver on Mars, written by Edwin Arnold and published in 1905. That was the first story in this genre that I have been able to trace. Jules Verne had got pretty close, I suppose, but he never had a hero battling against space creatures or having adventures on another planet. A whole new genre developed from that idea.
Director Francis Ford Coppola, who accompanied Lucas in trying to buy the Flash Gordon rights, recounted in 1999: "[George] was very depressed because he had just come back and they wouldn't sell him Flash Gordon. And he says, 'Well, I'll just invent my own.'" He secured a two-film development deal with United Artists; the two films were American Graffiti and a space opera, tentatively titled "The Star Wars" and inspired by Flash Gordon. Lucas would later say that he had the idea for an original space opera long before 1971, and that he even tried to film it before American Graffiti. Believing that the bleak tone of THX 1138 led to its poor reception, Lucas chose to make Star Wars more optimistic; this is what led to its fun and adventurous tone.Lucas went to United Artists and showed them the script for American Graffiti, but they passed on the film, which was then picked up by Universal Pictures. United Artists also passed on Lucas's space-opera concept, which he shelved for the time being. After spending the next two years completing American Graffiti, Lucas turned his attention to his space opera. He drew inspiration from politics of the era, later saying, "It was really about the Vietnam War, and that was the period where Nixon was trying to run for a [second] term."Lucas began writing in January 1973, "eight hours a day, five days a week", by taking small notes, inventing odd names and assigning them possible characterizations. Lucas would discard many of these by the time the final script was written, but he included several names and places in the final script or its sequels. He used these initial names and ideas to compile a two-page synopsis titled Journal of the Whills, which told the tale of the training of apprentice CJ Thorpe as a "Jedi-Bendu" space commando by the legendary Mace Windy. Frustrated that his story was too difficult to understand, Lucas then began writing a 13-page treatment called The Star Wars on April 17, 1973, which had narrative parallels with Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress.While impressed with the "innocence of the story, plus the sophistication of the world" of the film, United Artists declined to budget the film. Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz presented the film treatment to Universal Pictures, the studio that financed American Graffiti; while they agreed it could be "a very commercial venture", they had doubts about Mr. Lucas's ability to pull it all off, and said that Lucas should follow American Graffiti with more consequential themes. Coppola brought the project to a division of Paramount Pictures he ran with fellow directors Peter Bogdanovich and William Friedkin, but Friedkin questioned Lucas's ability to direct the film and he, along with Bogdanovich, declined to back it.
Lucas said, "I've always been an outsider to Hollywood types. They think I do weirdo films." According to Kurtz, Lew Wasserman, the head of Universal, "just didn't think much of science fiction at that time, didn't think it had much of a future then, with that particular audience." He said that "science fiction wasn't popular in the mid-'70s ... what seems to be the case generally is that the studio executives are looking for what was popular last year, rather than trying to look forward to what might be popular next year." Kurtz said, "Although Star Wars wasn't like [then-current science fiction] at all, it was just sort of lumped into that same kind of category."Lucas explained in 1977 that the film is not "about the future" and that it "is a fantasy much closer to the Brothers Grimm than it is to 2001." He added: "My main reason for making it was to give young people an honest, wholesome fantasy life, the kind my generation had. We had Westerns, pirate movies, all kinds of great things. Now they have The Six Million Dollar Man and Kojak. Where are the romance, the adventure, and the fun that used to be in practically every movie made?" Lucas would later recontextualize the discussion around the film, saying it was born out of research into "psychological underpinnings of mythology", a claim that had been dismissed by Kurtz: "The whole idea of Star Wars as a mythological thing, I think came about because of [later Lucas] interviews that tied it to The Hero with a Thousand Faces" and by Steven Hart and Michael Kaminski: "It is here that the true origin of Star Wars comes from – not from myth and legend, but from the 'schlock' sold on newspapers stands and played in matinees."There were also concerns regarding the project's potentially high budget. Lucas and Kurtz, in pitching the film, said that it would be "low-budget, Roger Corman style, and the budget was never going to be more than—well, originally we had proposed about 8 million, it ended up being about 10. Both of those figures are very low budget by Hollywood standards at the time." After Walt Disney Productions turned down the project, Lucas and Kurtz persisted in securing a studio to support the film because "other people had read it and said, 'Yeah, it could be a good idea.'" Lucas pursued Alan Ladd Jr., the head of 20th Century-Fox, and in June 1973 completed a deal to write and direct the film. Although Ladd did not grasp the technical side of the project, he believed that Lucas was talented. Lucas later stated that Ladd "invested in me, he did not invest in the movie." The deal gave Lucas $150,000 to write and direct the film. American Graffiti's positive reception afforded Lucas the leverage necessary to renegotiate his deal with Ladd and request the sequel rights to the film in August 1973. For Lucas, this deal protected Star Wars's potential sequels and most of the merchandising profits.: 19 


=== Writing ===

Since commencing his writing process in January 1973, Lucas had done "various rewrites in the evenings after the day's work." He would write four different screenplays for Star Wars, "searching for just the right ingredients, characters and storyline. It's always been what you might call a good idea in search of a story." By May 1974, he had expanded the treatment for The Star Wars into a rough draft screenplay,: 14  adding elements such as the Sith, the Death Star, and a general by the name of Annikin Starkiller. He changed Starkiller to an adolescent boy, and he shifted the general into a supporting role as a member of a family of dwarfs. Lucas envisioned the Corellian smuggler, Han Solo, as a large, green-skinned monster with gills. He based Chewbacca on his Alaskan Malamute dog, Indiana (whom he would later use as eponym for his character Indiana Jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the passenger seat of his car.Lucas completed a second draft in January 1975 as Adventures of the Starkiller, Episode One: The Star Wars, making heavy simplifications and introducing the young hero on a farm as Luke Starkiller. Annikin became Luke's father, a wise Jedi knight. "The Force" was also introduced as a mystical energy field. This draft still had some differences from the final version in the characters and relationships. For example, Luke had several brothers, as well as his father, who appears in a minor role at the end of the film. The script became more of a fairy tale quest as opposed to the action/adventure of the previous versions. This version ended with another text crawl, previewing the next story in the series. This draft was also the first to introduce the concept of a Jedi turning to the dark side: the draft included a historical Jedi who was the first to ever fall to the dark side, and then trained the Sith to use it. The script would introduce the concept of a Jedi Master and his son, who trains to be a Jedi under his father's friend; this would ultimately form the basis for the film and, later, the trilogy. However, in this draft, the father is a hero who is still alive at the start of the film. Han Solo and Chewbacca's identities closely resembled those seen in the finished film. According to Lucas, the second draft was over 200 pages long, and led him to split up the story into multiple films spanning over multiple trilogies.Lucas began to rewrite this draft, creating a synopsis for the third draft. During work on this rewrite, Lucas began researching the science-fiction genre by watching films and reading books (including J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit) and comics. He also claims to have read scholastic works like Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, James George Frazer's The Golden Bough, and even Bruno Bettelheim's The Uses of Enchantment. These claims are doubted by Michael Kaminski and Chris Taylor, with Kaminski pointing out that Bettelheim's book would not come out until after Star Wars was filmed and adding that "the original trilogy-Campbell connection is greatly exaggerated and practically non-existent", noting that, in fact, the second draft is "even closer to Campbell's structure" than the third.According to Lucas, he wrote a rough draft of about 250–300 pages long, which contained the outline for the entire original Star Wars trilogy. He realized that it was too long for a single film, and decided to subdivide it into a trilogy. Lucas stated that the story evolved over time and that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now [in 1983] ... As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ... I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday." He later described that, having split the script into three episodes, "the first part didn't really work", so he had to take the ending off of Episode VI and put it in the original Star Wars, which resulted in a Death Star being included in both films. In 1975, Lucas suggested he could make a trilogy, which "ends with the destruction of the Empire" and a possible prequel "about the backstory of Kenobi as a young man". After the film's smash success, Lucasfilm announced that Lucas had already written "twelve stories in the Adventures of Luke Skywalker" which, according to Kurtz, were set to be "separate adventures rather than direct sequels."During the writing of the third draft, Lucas hired conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie to create paintings of certain scenes, several of which Lucas included with his screenplay when he delivered it to 20th Century-Fox. On February 27, the studio granted a budget of $5 million; this was later increased to $8.25 million.: 17:30  Subsequently, Lucas started writing with a budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the film, and (with Fox having just shut down its special effects department) reducing the number of complex special effects shots called for by the script.
The third draft, dated August 1, 1975, was titled The Star Wars From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. This third draft had most of the elements of the final plot, with only some differences in the characters and settings. The draft characterized Luke as an only child, with his father already dead, replacing him with a substitute named Ben Kenobi. This script would be re-written for the fourth and final draft, dated January 1, 1976, as The Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I: The Star Wars. Lucas worked with his friends Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck to revise the fourth draft into the final pre-production script.Lucas finished writing his script in March 1976, when the crew started filming. He said, "What finally emerged through the many drafts of the script has obviously been influenced by science-fiction and action-adventure I've read and seen. And I've seen a lot of it. I'm trying to make a classic sort of genre picture, a classic space fantasy in which all the influences are working together. There are certain traditional aspects of the genre I wanted to keep and help perpetuate in Star Wars." During production, he changed Luke's name from Starkiller to Skywalker and altered the title to The Star Wars and later Star Wars. He would also continue to tweak the script during filming, including adding the death of Obi-Wan after realizing he served no purpose in the ending of the film.For the film's opening crawl, Lucas originally wrote a composition consisting of six paragraphs with four sentences each. He said, "The crawl is such a hard thing because you have to be careful that you're not using too many words that people don't understand. It's like a poem." Lucas showed his draft to his friends. Director Brian De Palma, who was there, described it: "The crawl at the beginning looks like it was written on a driveway. It goes on forever. It's gibberish." Lucas recounted what De Palma said the first time he saw it: "George, you're out of your mind! Let me sit down and write this for you." De Palma and Jay Cocks helped edit the text into the form used in the film.


=== Design ===
George Lucas recruited many conceptual designers, including Colin Cantwell, who worked on 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), to conceptualize the initial spacecraft models; Alex Tavoularis to create the preliminary conceptual storyboard sketches of early scripts; and Ralph McQuarrie to visualize the characters, costumes, props, and scenery. McQuarrie's pre-production paintings of certain scenes from Lucas's early screenplay drafts helped 20th Century-Fox visualize the film, which positively influenced their decision to fund the project. After McQuarrie's drawings for Lucas's colleagues Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins (who were collaborating for a film) caught his interest, Lucas met with McQuarrie to discuss his plans for the untitled space fantasy film he wanted to make. Two years later, after completing American Graffiti, Lucas approached McQuarrie and asked him if he would be interested "in doing something for Star Wars." McQuarrie produced a series of artworks from simple sketches; these set a visual tone for the film, and for the rest of the original trilogy.

The film was ambitious in that Lucas wanted to create fresh prop prototypes and sets (based on McQuarrie's paintings) that had never been realized before in science-fiction films. He commissioned production designers John Barry and Roger Christian, who were working on the sets of the film Lucky Lady (1975) when Lucas first approached them, to work on the production sets. Christian recounted in 2014: "George came to the set I was doing, it was an old salt factory design and he helped me shovel salt, just like two students in plaid shirts and sneakers. And we spoke and he looked at the set and couldn't believe it wasn't real." They had a conversation with Lucas on what he would like the film to appear like, with them creating the desired sets. Christian said that Lucas "didn't want anything [in Star Wars] to stand out, he wanted it [to look] all real and used. And I said, 'Finally somebody's doing it the right way.'"Lucas described a "used future" concept to the production designers in which all devices, ships, and buildings to do with Tatooine or the Rebels looked aged and dirty, as opposed to the sleeker designs of the Empire. Lucas also wanted the spaceships to look "cobbled together, as opposed to a sleek monoshape." Barry said that the director "wants to make it look like it's shot on location on your average everyday Death Star or Mos Eisley Spaceport or local cantina." Lucas believed that "what is required for true credibility is a used future", opposing the interpretation of "future in most futurist movies" that "always looks new and clean and shiny." Christian supported Lucas's vision, saying, "All science fiction before was very plastic and stupid uniforms and Flash Gordon stuff. Nothing was new. George was going right against that."The designers started working with the director before Star Wars was approved by 20th Century-Fox. For four to five months, in a studio in Kensal Rise, England, they attempted to plan the creation of the props and sets with "no money." Although Lucas initially provided funds using his earnings from American Graffiti, it was inadequate. As they could not afford to dress the sets, Christian was forced to use unconventional methods and materials to achieve the desired look. He suggested that Lucas use scrap in making the dressings, and the director agreed. Christian said, "I've always had this idea. I used to do it with models when I was a kid. I'd stick things on them and we'd make things look old." Barry, Christian, and their team began designing the props and sets at Elstree Studios.According to Christian, the Millennium Falcon set was the most difficult to build. Christian wanted the interior of the Falcon to look like that of a submarine. He found scrap airplane metal "that no one wanted in those days and bought them." He began his creation process by breaking down jet engines into scrap pieces, giving him the chance to "stick it in the sets in specific ways." It took him several weeks to finish the chess set (which he described as "the most encrusted set") in the hold of the Falcon. The garbage compactor set "was also pretty hard, because I knew I had actors in there and the walls had to come in, and they had to be in dirty water and I had to get stuff that would be light enough so it wouldn't hurt them but also not bobbing around." A total of 30 sets consisting of planets, starships, caves, control rooms, cantinas, and the Death Star corridors were created; all of the nine soundstages at Elstree were used to accommodate them. The massive rebel hangar set was housed at a second sound stage at Shepperton Studios; the stage was the largest in Europe at the time.


=== Filming ===

In 1975, Lucas formed his own visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) after discovering that 20th Century-Fox's visual effects department had been disbanded. ILM began its work on Star Wars in a warehouse in Van Nuys. Most of the visual effects used pioneering digital motion control photography developed by John Dykstra and his team, which created the illusion of size by employing small models and slowly moving cameras. The technology is now known as the Dykstraflex system. Brian Johnson also turned down the opportunity to work on the film because he was busy working on Space: 1999.Lucas tried "to get a cohesive reality" for his feature. Since the film is a fairy tale, as he had described, "I still wanted it to have an ethereal quality, yet be well composed and, also, have an alien look." He designed the film to have an "extremely bizarre, Gregg Toland-like surreal look with strange over-exposed colors, a lot of shadows, a lot of hot areas." Lucas wanted Star Wars to embrace the combination of "strange graphics of fantasy" and "the feel of a documentary" to impress a distinct look. To achieve this, he hired the British cinematographer Gilbert Taylor. Originally, Lucas's first choice for the position was Geoffrey Unsworth, who also provided the cinematography for 2001: A Space Odyssey. Unsworth was interested in working with the director, and initially accepted the job when it was offered to him by Lucas and Kurtz. He eventually withdrew to work on the Vincente Minnelli-directed A Matter of Time (1976) instead, which "really annoy[ed]" Kurtz. Lucas called up for other cinematographers, and eventually chose Taylor, basing his choice on Taylor's cinematography for Dr. Strangelove and A Hard Day's Night (both 1964). On his decision, Lucas said: "I thought they were good, eccentrically photographed pictures with a strong documentary flavor."Taylor said that Lucas, who was consumed by the details of the complicated production, "avoided all meetings and contact with me from day one, so I read the extra-long script many times and made my own decisions as to how I would shoot the picture." Taylor also said, "I took it upon myself to experiment with photographing the lightsabers and other things onstage before we moved on to our two weeks of location work in Tunisia." Taylor was aware of the "enormous amount of process work" to follow principal photography and believed "a crisp result would help."During production, Lucas and Taylor—whom Kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety"—had disputes over filming. With a background in independent filmmaking, Lucas was accustomed to creating most of the elements of the film himself. His lighting suggestions were rejected by Taylor, who believed that Lucas was overstepping his boundaries by giving specific instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself. Taylor refused to use the soft-focus lenses and gauze Lucas wanted after Fox executives complained about the look. Kurtz stated that "In a couple of scenes ... rather than saying, 'It looks a bit over lit, can you fix that?', [Lucas would] say, 'turn off this light, and turn off that light.' And Gil would say, 'No, I won't do that, I've lit it the way I think it should be—tell me what's the effect that you want, and I'll make a judgment about what to do with my lights.'"
Originally, Lucas envisioned the planet of Tatooine, where much of the film would take place, as a jungle planet. Kurtz traveled to the Philippines to scout locations; however, because of the idea of spending months filming in the jungle would make Lucas "itchy", the director refined his vision and made Tatooine a desert planet instead. Kurtz then researched all American, North African, and Middle Eastern deserts, and found Tunisia, near the Sahara desert, as the ideal location. Lucas later stated that he had wanted to make it look like outer space.When principal photography began on March 22, 1976, in the Tunisian desert for the scenes on Tatooine, the project faced several problems. Lucas fell behind schedule in the first week of shooting due to malfunctioning props and electronic breakdowns. Moreover, a rare Tunisian rainstorm struck the country, which further disrupted filming. Taylor said, "you couldn't really see where the land ended and the sky began. It was all a gray mess, and the robots were just a blur." Given this situation, Lucas requested heavy filtration, which Taylor rejected, who said: "I thought the look of the film should be absolutely clean ... But George saw it differently, so we tried using nets and other diffusion. He asked to set up one shot on the robots with a 300 mm, and the sand and sky just mushed together. I told him it wouldn't work, but he said that was the way he wanted to do the entire film, all diffused." This difference was later settled by 20th Century-Fox executives, who backed Taylor's suggestion.Filming began in Chott el Djerid, while a construction crew in Tozeur took eight weeks to transform the desert into the desired setting. Other locations included the sand dunes of the Tunisian desert near Nafta, where a scene featuring a giant skeleton of a creature lying in the background as R2-D2 and C-3PO make their way across the sands was filmed. When Daniels wore the C-3PO outfit for the first time in Tunisia, the left leg piece shattered down through the plastic covering his left foot, stabbing him. He also could not see through his costume's eyes, which was covered with gold to prevent corrosion. Abnormal radio signals caused by the Tunisian sands made the radio-controlled R2-D2 models run out of control. Baker said: "I was incredibly grateful each time an [R2] would actually work right." After several scenes were filmed against the volcanic canyons outside Tozeur, production moved to Matmata to film Luke's home on Tatooine. Lucas chose Hotel Sidi Driss, which is larger than the typical underground dwellings, to shoot the interior of Luke's homestead. During the filming of the Jawa Sandcrawler, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, who did not have good relations with Tunisia at the time, allegedly mistook the crawler as a military vehicle to be utilized against him. When Gaddafi threatened the Tunisian Government, Lucas and the Tunisian Army quickly moved his filming crew to a more discreet location. Additional scenes for Tatooine were filmed at Death Valley in North America.After two-and-a-half weeks of filming in Tunisia, production moved to Elstree Studios, near London, to film interior scenes. Elstree was chosen as a studio over other options in Hollywood or elsewhere. Star Wars required the use of nine different sound stages simultaneously, which most studios couldn't accommodate. Because of stricter working conditions, filming in Britain had to finish by 5:30 pm, unless Lucas was in the middle of a scene. He often made requests for more time to shoot, but they were usually turned down.Despite Lucas's efforts, his crew had little interest in the film. Most of the crew considered the project a "children's film", rarely took their work seriously, and often found it unintentionally humorous. Actor Baker later confessed that he thought the film would be a failure. Ford found it strange that "there's a princess with weird buns in her hair", and called Chewbacca a "giant in a monkey suit."The Elstree sets designed by John Barry, according to Gilbert Taylor, "were like a coal mine." He said that "they were all black and gray, with really no opportunities for lighting at all." To resolve the problem, he worked the lighting into the sets by chopping in its walls, ceiling and floors. This would result in "a 'cut-out' system of panel lighting", with quartz lamps that could be placed in the holes in the walls, ceiling and floors. His idea was supported by the Fox studio, which agreed that "we couldn't have this 'black hole of Calcutta.'" The lighting approach Taylor devised "allowed George to shoot in almost any direction without extensive relighting, which gave him more freedom." In total, the filming in Britain took 14+1⁄2 weeks.
Lucas commissioned computer programmer Larry Cuba to create the animated Death Star plans shown at the rebel base on Yavin 4. This was written with the GRASS programming language, exported to a Vector General monitor and filmed on 35 mm to be rear-projected on the set. It is the only computer animation in the original version of the film. The Yavin scenes were filmed in the Mayan temples at Tikal, Guatemala. Lucas selected the location as a potential filming site after seeing a poster of it hanging at a travel agency while he was filming in Britain. This inspired him to send a film crew to Guatemala in March 1977 to shoot scenes. While filming in Tikal, the crew paid locals with a six-pack of beer to watch over the camera equipment for several days.While shooting, Lucas rarely spoke to the actors, who believed that he expected too much of them while providing little direction. His directions to the actors usually consisted of the words "faster" and "more intense". Kurtz stated that "it happened a lot where he would just say, 'Let's try it again a little bit faster.' That was about the only instruction he'd give anybody. A lot of actors don't mind—they don't care, they just get on with it. But some actors really need a lot of pampering and a lot of feedback, and if they don't get it, they get paranoid that they might not be doing a good job." Kurtz has said that Lucas "wasn't gregarious, he's very much a loner and very shy, so he didn't like large groups of people, he didn't like working with a large crew, he didn't like working with a lot of actors."Alec Guinness begged Lucas to kill off Obi-Wan as he did not want to go on to speak those "awful bloody lines".Ladd offered Lucas some of the only support from the studio; he dealt with scrutiny from board members over the rising budget and complex screenplay drafts. Initially, Fox approved $8 million for the project; Gary Kurtz said: "we proceeded to pick a production plan and do a more final budget with a British art department and look for locations in North Africa, and kind of pulled together some things. Then, it was obvious that 8 million wasn't going to do it—they had approved 8 million." After requests from the team that "it had to be more," the executives "got a bit scared." For two weeks, Lucas and his crew "didn't really do anything except kind of pull together new budget figures." At the same time, after production fell behind schedule, Ladd told Lucas he had to finish production within a week or he would be forced to shut down production. Kurtz said that "it came out to be like 9.8 or .9 or something like that, and in the end they just said, 'Yes, that's okay, we'll go ahead.'" The crew split into three units, with those units led by Lucas, Kurtz, and production supervisor Robert Watts. Under the new system, the project met the studio's deadline.Lucas had to write around a scene featuring a human Jabba the Hutt, which was scrapped due to budget and time constraints. Lucas would later claim he wanted to superimpose a stop-motion creature over the actor—which he did with computer-generated imagery (CGI) in the 1997 Special Edition. All of the original script drafts describe Jabba as humanoid, with the notion of him being an alien not coming up until work on the 1979 re-release. According to Greedo actor Paul Blake, his own character was created as a result of Lucas having to cut the Jabba scene.During production, the cast attempted to make Lucas laugh or smile, as he often appeared depressed. At one point, the project became so demanding that Lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce his stress level. Post-production was equally stressful due to increasing pressure from 20th Century-Fox. Moreover, Hamill's car accident left his face visibly scarred, which restricted re-shoots.


=== Post-production ===
Star Wars was originally slated for release on Christmas 1976; however, its production delays pushed the film's release to mid-1977. Editor John Jympson began cutting the film together while Lucas was still filming in Tunisia; as Lucas noted, the editor was in an "impossible position" because Lucas had not explained any of the film's material to him. When Lucas watched Jympson's rough cut for the first time, he disliked what he saw. J. W. Rinzler wrote that "Jympson's selection of takes was questionable, and he seemed to be having trouble doing match-cuts." Lucas was prepared to give Jympson more time; Jympson disliked Lucas's working style. As production went on, Lucas still disapproved of Jympson's cut and fired him halfway through the film's production. He commented: "Unfortunately it didn't work out. It's very hard when you are hiring people to know if they are going to mesh with you and if you are going to get what you want. In the end, I don't think he fully understood the movie and what I was trying to do. I shoot in a very peculiar way, in a documentary style, and it takes a lot of hard editing to make it work." After attempting to persuade Jympson to cut the film his way, Lucas replaced him with Paul Hirsch, Richard Chew, and his then-wife, Marcia Lucas, who was also cutting the film New York, New York (1977) with Lucas's friend Martin Scorsese. Richard Chew considered the film to have been cut in a slow, by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master shots that flowed into close-up coverage. He found that the pace was dictated by the actors instead of the cuts. Hirsch and Chew worked on two reels simultaneously.Jympson's original assembly contained a large amount of footage which differed from the final cut of the film, including several alternate takes and a number of scenes which were subsequently deleted to improve the narrative pace. The most significant material cut was a series of scenes from the first part of the film which introduced Luke Skywalker. These early scenes, set in Anchorhead on the planet Tatooine, presented the audience with Luke's everyday life among his friends as it is affected by the space battle above the planet; they also introduced the character of Biggs Darklighter, Luke's closest friend who departs to join the rebellion. Chew explained the rationale behind removing these scenes as a narrative decision: "In the first five minutes, we were hitting everybody with more information than they could handle. There were too many story lines to keep straight: the robots and the Princess, Vader, Luke. So we simplified it by taking out Luke and Biggs." In an examination of this early cut, which has come to be called the "Lost Cut", David West Reynolds noted the film adopted a "documentary-like" approach that emphasized "clarity, especially in geographic and spatial relationships" over "dramatic or artistic concerns". As a result, the film was more "leisurely paced". Reynolds estimated this early cut contained "30–40%" different footage from the final cut, with most of the differences coming from extended cuts or alternate takes rather than deleted scenes.After viewing a rough cut, Alan Ladd likened the early Anchorhead scenes to "American Graffiti in outer space". Lucas was looking for a way of accelerating the storytelling, and removing Luke's early scenes would distinguish Star Wars from his earlier teenage drama and "get that American Graffiti feel out of it". Lucas also stated that he wanted to move the narrative focus to C-3PO and R2-D2: "At the time, to have the first half-hour of the film be mainly about robots was a bold idea."Meanwhile, Industrial Light & Magic was struggling to achieve unprecedented special effects. The company had spent half of its budget on four shots that Lucas deemed unacceptable. With hundreds of uncompleted shots remaining, ILM was forced to finish a year's work in six months. Lucas inspired ILM by editing together aerial dogfights from old war films, which enhanced the pacing of the scenes.Burtt had created a library of sounds that Lucas referred to as an "organic soundtrack". Blaster sounds were a modified recording of a steel cable, under tension, being struck. The lightsaber sound effect was developed by Burtt as a combination of the hum of idling interlock motors in aged movie projectors and interference caused by a television set on a shieldless microphone. Burtt discovered the latter accidentally as he was looking for a buzzing, sparking sound to add to the projector-motor hum. For Chewbacca's growls, Burtt recorded and combined sounds made by bears, lions, badgers, seals, and walruses to create phrases and sentences. Lucas and Burtt created the robotic voice of R2-D2 by filtering their voices through an electronic synthesizer. Darth Vader's breathing was achieved by Burtt breathing through the mask of a scuba regulator implanted with a microphone, which began the idea of Vader having been a burn-victim, which had not been the case during production.In February 1977, Lucas screened an early cut of the film for Fox executives, several director friends, along with Roy Thomas and Howard Chaykin of Marvel Comics who were preparing a Star Wars comic book. The cut had a different crawl from the finished version and used Prowse's voice for Darth Vader. It also lacked most special effects; hand-drawn arrows took the place of blaster beams, and when the Millennium Falcon fought TIE fighters, the film cut to footage of World War II dogfights. The reactions of the directors present, such as Brian De Palma, John Milius, and Steven Spielberg, disappointed Lucas. Spielberg, who said he was the only person in the audience to have enjoyed the film, believed that the lack of enthusiasm was due to the absence of finished special effects. Lucas later said that the group was honest and seemed bemused by the film. In contrast, Ladd and the other studio executives loved the film; Gareth Wigan told Lucas: "This is the greatest film I've ever seen" and cried during the screening. Lucas found the experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any approval from studio executives before. The delays increased the budget from $8 million to $11 million.With the project $2 million over budget, Lucas was forced to make numerous artistic compromises to complete Star Wars. Ladd reluctantly agreed to release an extra $20,000 funding and in early 1977 second unit filming completed a number of sequences including exterior desert shots for Tatooine in Death Valley and China Lake Acres in California, and exterior Yavin jungle shots in Guatemala, along with additional studio footage to complete the Mos Eisley Cantina sequence.


== Soundtrack ==

On the recommendation of Spielberg, Lucas hired John Williams, who had worked with Spielberg on the film Jaws, for which he won an Academy Award. Lucas originally hired Williams to consult on music editing choices and to compose the source music for the music, telling Williams that he intended to use extant music. Lucas believed that the film would portray visually foreign worlds, but that a grand musical score would give the audience an emotional familiarity. Therefore, Lucas assembled his favorite orchestral pieces for the soundtrack, until Williams convinced him that an original score would be unique and more unified, having viewed Lucas's music choices as a temp track. However, a few of Williams's eventual pieces were influenced by the temp track: the "Main Title Theme" was inspired by the theme from the 1942 film Kings Row, scored by Erich Wolfgang Korngold; and the track "Dune Sea of Tatooine" drew from the soundtrack of Bicycle Thieves, scored by Alessandro Cicognini. Lucas would later deny having ever conceived using extant music for the film.In March 1977, Williams conducted the London Symphony Orchestra to record the Star Wars soundtrack in 12 days. The original soundtrack was released as a double LP in 1977 by 20th Century Records. 20th Century Records also released The Story of Star Wars that year, a narrated audio drama adaptation of the film utilizing some of its original music, dialogue, and sound effects.
The American Film Institute's list of best film scores ranks the Star Wars soundtrack at number one.


== Cinematic and literary allusions ==

According to Lucas, different concepts of the film were inspired by numerous sources, such as Beowulf and King Arthur for the origins of myth and religion. Lucas had originally intended to remake the 1930s Flash Gordon film serials but was unable to obtain the rights; thus, he resorted to drawing from Akira Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress and, allegedly, Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Star Wars features many elements derived from Flash Gordon, such as the conflict between rebels and Imperial Forces, the wipes between scenes, the fusion of futuristic technology and traditional mythology, and the famous opening crawl that begins each film. The film has also been compared to The Wizard of Oz (1939).The influence of The Hidden Fortress can be seen in the relationship between C-3PO and R2-D2, which evolved from the two bickering peasants, Tahei and Matashichi, and a Japanese family crest seen in the earlier film is similar to the Imperial Crest. Star Wars also borrows heavily from another Kurosawa film, Yojimbo (1961). In both films, several men threaten the hero, bragging about how wanted they are by the authorities, and have an arm being cut off by a blade; Kuwabatake Sanjuro (played by Toshiro Mifune) is offered "twenty-five ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the mission", whereas Han Solo is offered "Two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach Alderaan." Its sequel Sanjuro (1962) also inspired the hiding-under-the-floor trick featured in the film. Another source of influence was Lawrence of Arabia (1962), which inspired the film's visual approach, including long-lens desert shots. There are also thematic parallels, including the freedom fight by a rebel army against an empire, and politicians who meddle behind the scenes.Tatooine is similar to the desert planet of Arrakis from Frank Herbert's Dune series. Arrakis is the only known source of a longevity spice; Star Wars makes references to spice in "the spice mines of Kessel", and a spice freighter. Other similarities include those between Princess Leia and Princess Alia, and Jedi mind tricks and "The Voice", a controlling ability used by the Bene Gesserit. In passing, Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru are "moisture farmers"; in Dune, dew collectors are used by Fremen to "provide a small but reliable source of water." Frank Herbert reported that "David Lynch, [director of the 1984 film Dune] had trouble with the fact that Star Wars used up so much of Dune." The pair found "sixteen points of identity" and they calculated that "the odds against coincidence produced a number larger than the number of stars in the universe."The Death Star assault scene was modeled after the World War II film The Dam Busters (1955), in which Royal Air Force Lancaster bombers fly along heavily defended reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams to cripple the heavy industry of Germany's Ruhr region. Some of the dialogue in The Dam Busters is repeated in the Star Wars climax; Gilbert Taylor also filmed the special effects sequences in The Dam Busters. In addition, the sequence was partially inspired by the climax of the film 633 Squadron (1964), directed by Walter Grauman, in which RAF de Havilland Mosquitos attack a German heavy water plant by flying down a narrow fjord to drop special bombs at a precise point, while avoiding anti-aircraft guns and German fighters. Clips from both films were included in Lucas's temporary dogfight footage version of the sequence. There are also similarities in the Death Star trench sequence to the bridge attack scene in The Bridges at Toko-Ri.The opening shot of Star Wars, in which a detailed spaceship fills the screen overhead, is a reference to the scene introducing the interplanetary spacecraft Discovery One in Stanley Kubrick's seminal 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey. The earlier big-budget science-fiction film influenced the look of Star Wars in many other ways, including the use of EVA pods and hexagonal corridors. The Death Star has a docking bay reminiscent of the one on the orbiting space station in 2001. Although golden and male, C-3PO was inspired by the silver female robot Maria, the Maschinenmensch from Fritz Lang's 1927 film Metropolis.


== Marketing ==
While the film was in production, a logo was commissioned from Dan Perri, a title sequence designer who had worked on the titles for films such as The Exorcist (1973) and Taxi Driver (1976). Perri devised a foreshortened STAR WARS logotype consisting of block-capital letters filled with stars and skewed towards a vanishing point. This logo design was originally conceived to follow the same perspective as the film's opening crawl. In the end, Perri's logo was not used for the film's opening title sequence, although it was used widely on pre-release print advertising and on cinema marquees.The logotype eventually selected for on-screen use originated in a promotional brochure that was distributed by Fox to cinema owners in 1976. This brochure was designed by Suzy Rice, a young art director at the Los Angeles advertising agency Seiniger Advertising. On a visit to ILM in Van Nuys, Rice was instructed by Lucas to produce a logo that would intimidate the viewer, and he reportedly asked for the logo to appear "very fascist" in style. Rice's response to her brief was to use an outlined, modified Helvetica Black. After some feedback from Lucas, Rice decided to join the S and T of STAR and the R and S of WARS. Lucas signed off on the brochure in between takes while filming inserts for the Mos Eisley Cantina scene. Gary Kurtz was impressed with Rice's logo and selected it over Perri's design for the film's opening titles, after modifying the letter W to flatten the pointed tips originally designed by Rice. This finalized the design of one of the most recognizable logos in cinema design, although Rice's contribution was not credited in the film.For the US release in 1977, 20th Century-Fox commissioned a promotional film poster from the advertising agency Smolen, Smith and Connolly. They used the freelance artist Tom Jung who was given the brief of "good over evil." His poster, known as Style 'A', depicted Luke Skywalker standing in a heroic pose, brandishing a shining lightsaber above his head, with Princess Leia below him, and a large, ghostly image of Darth Vader's helmet looming behind them. Some Fox executives considered this poster "too dark" and commissioned the Brothers Hildebrandt, a pair of well-known fantasy artists, to rework it for the UK release. When the film opened in British theaters, the Hildebrandts' Style 'B' poster was used in cinema billboards. Fox and Lucasfilm subsequently decided that they wanted to promote the new film with a less stylized and more realistic depiction of the lead characters. Producer Gary Kurtz turned to the film poster artist Tom Chantrell, who was already well known for his prolific work for Hammer horror films, and commissioned a new version. Two months after Star Wars opened, the Hildebrandts' poster was replaced by Chantrell's Style 'C' poster in UK cinemas.Charles Lippincott was the marketing director for Star Wars. As 20th Century-Fox gave little support for marketing beyond licensing T-shirts and posters, Lippincott was forced to look elsewhere. He secured deals with Marvel Comics for a comic book adaptation, and with Del Rey Books for a novelization. A fan of science fiction, he used his contacts to promote the film at the San Diego Comic-Con and elsewhere within science-fiction fandom.


== Release ==


=== MPAA rating ===
When the film was submitted to the Motion Picture Association of America's rating board, the votes for the rating were evenly split between G and PG. Fox requested for the film to be rated PG due to concerns that the film would be too scary for young children and due to fears that teenagers would avoid the film if it was rated G. Lucasfilm marketer, Charley Lippincott supported Fox's stance for the film to be rated PG after witnessing his 5-year-old child being upset with a scene in which Darth Vader chokes Captain Antilles. One of Lippincott's friends worked at the rating board and she agreed with his stance. The board reneged and gave the film a PG rating.


=== First public screening ===
On May 1, 1977, the first public screening was held at Northpoint Theatre in San Francisco, where American Graffiti was test-screened, four years earlier.


=== Premiere and initial release ===
Worried that Star Wars would be beaten out by other summer films, such as Smokey and the Bandit, 20th Century-Fox moved the release date to May 25, the Wednesday before Memorial Day. However, only 37 theaters ordered the film to be shown in North America. In response, the studio demanded that theaters order Star Wars if they wanted the eagerly anticipated The Other Side of Midnight based on Sidney Sheldon's 1973 novel by the same name.Star Wars debuted on Wednesday, May 25, 1977, in fewer than 32 theaters, and eight more on Thursday and Friday. Kurtz said in 2002, "That would be laughable today." It immediately broke box office records, effectively becoming one of the first blockbuster films, and Fox accelerated plans to broaden its release. Lucas himself was not able to predict how successful Star Wars would be. After visiting the set of the Steven Spielberg film Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Lucas was sure Close Encounters would outperform the yet-to-be-released Star Wars at the box office. Spielberg disagreed, and believed Star Wars would be the bigger hit. Lucas proposed they trade 2.5% of the profit on each other's films; Spielberg took the trade, and still receives 2.5% of the profits from Star Wars.Amidst Fox pessimism, Lucas elected to forgo his option to an extra $500,000 fee for directing Star Wars, in exchange for obtaining the merchandising and sequel rights for the movie from Fox.The Other Side of Midnight was supposed to be the studio's big summer hit, while Lucas's movie was considered the "B track" for theater owners nationwide. While Fox requested Mann's Chinese Theatre, the studio promised that the film needed only two weeks. Fearing that the film would fail, Lucas had made plans to be in Hawaii with his wife Marcia. Having forgotten that the film would open that day, he spent most of Wednesday in a sound studio in Los Angeles. When Lucas went out for lunch with Marcia, they encountered a long line of people along the sidewalks leading to Mann's Chinese Theatre, waiting to see Star Wars. He was still skeptical of the film's success, even with enthusiastic reports from Ladd and the studio. While in Hawaii, it was not until he watched Walter Cronkite discuss the gigantic crowds for Star Wars on CBS Evening News that Lucas realized he had become very wealthy. Francis Ford Coppola, who needed money to finish Apocalypse Now, sent a telegram to Lucas's hotel asking for funding. Even technical crew members, such as model makers, were asked for autographs, and cast members became instant household names; when Harrison Ford visited a record store to buy an album, enthusiastic fans tore half his shirt off.

The film was a huge success for 20th Century-Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company. Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price had doubled to a record high. Prior to 1977, 20th Century-Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.Although the film's cultural neutrality helped it to gain international success, Ladd became anxious during the premiere in Japan. After the screening, the audience was silent, leading him to fear that the film would be unsuccessful. Ladd was reassured by his local contacts that this was a positive reaction considering that in Japan, silence was the greatest honor to a film, and the subsequent strong box office returns confirmed its popularity.After two weeks William Friedkin's Sorcerer replaced Star Wars at Mann's Chinese Theatre because of contractual obligations; Mann Theatres moved the film to a less-prestigious location after quickly renovating it. When Star Wars made an unprecedented second opening at Mann's Chinese Theatre on August 3, 1977, after Sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a ceremony in which C-3PO, R2-D2 and Darth Vader placed their footprints in the theater's forecourt. At that time Star Wars was playing in 1,096 theaters in the United States. Approximately 60 theaters played the film continuously for over a year; in 1978, Lucasfilm distributed "Birthday Cake" posters to those theaters for special events on May 25, the one-year anniversary of the film's release. Star Wars premiered in the UK on December 27, 1977. News reports of the film's popularity in America caused long lines to form at the two London theaters that first offered the film; it became available in 12 large cities in January 1978, and other London theaters in February.


=== Box office ===
Star Wars remains one of the most financially successful films of all time. The film opened on a Wednesday in 32 theaters expanding to 43 screens on the Friday and earning $2,556,418 in its first six days to the end of the Memorial Day weekend ($12.3 million in 2022 dollars). Per Variety's weekly box office charts, the film was number one at the US box office for its first three weeks. It was replaced by The Deep but gradually added screens and returned to number one in its seventh week, building up to $7 million weekends as it entered wide release ($33.8 million in 2022 dollars) and remained number one for the next 15 weeks. It replaced Jaws as the highest-earning film in North America just six months into release, eventually earning over $220 million during its initial theatrical run ($1.06 billion in 2022 dollars). Star Wars entered international release towards the end of the year, and in 1978 added the worldwide record to its domestic one, earning $410 million in total. Its biggest international market was Japan, where it grossed $58.4 million.On July 21, 1978, while still in current release in 38 theaters in the U.S., the film expanded into a 1,744 theater national saturation windup of release and set a new U.S. weekend record of $10,202,726. The gross prior to the expansion was $221,280,994. The expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take its gross to $265,055,905. Reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought its cumulative gross in the U.S. and Canada to $323 million, and extended its global earnings to $530 million. In doing so, it became the first film to gross $500 million worldwide, and remained the highest-grossing film of all time until E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial broke that record in 1983.The release of the Special Edition in 1997 was the highest-grossing reissue of all-time with a gross of $138.3 million, bringing its total gross in the United States and Canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the all-time number one spot. Internationally, the reissue grossed $117.2 million, with $26 million from the United Kingdom and $15 million from Japan. In total, the film has grossed over $775 million worldwide.Adjusted for inflation, it had earned over $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011 prices, which saw it ranked as the third-highest-grossing film at the time, according to Guinness World Records. At the North American box office, it ranks second behind Gone with the Wind on the inflation-adjusted list.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===

Star Wars received critical acclaim. In his 1977 review, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times called the film "an out-of-body experience", compared its special effects to those of 2001: A Space Odyssey, and opined that the true strength of the film was its "pure narrative". Vincent Canby of The New York Times called the film "the movie that's going to entertain a lot of contemporary folk who have a soft spot for the virtually ritualized manners of comic-book adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most beautiful movie serial ever made". A.D. Murphy of Variety described the film as "magnificent" and said George Lucas had succeeded in his attempt to create the "biggest possible adventure fantasy" based on the serials and older action epics from his childhood. Writing for The Washington Post, Gary Arnold gave the film a positive review, writing that the film "is a new classic in a rousing movie tradition: a space swashbuckler." However, the film was not without its detractors: Pauline Kael of The New Yorker criticized Star Wars, stating that "there's no breather in the picture, no lyricism", and that it had no "emotional grip". John Simon of New York magazine also panned the film and wrote, "Strip Star Wars of its often striking images and its highfalutin scientific jargon, and you get a story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming banality." Stanley Kauffmann, reviewing the film in The New Republic, opined that it "was made for those (particularly males) who carry a portable shrine within them of their adolescence, a chalice of a Self that was Better Then, before the world's affairs or—in any complex way—sex intruded."When Star Wars opened in the UK, Derek Malcolm of The Guardian concluded that it "plays enough games to satisfy the most sophisticated", though he stated that Lucas's earlier films were better. Barry Norman of Film... called the movie "family entertainment at its most sublime", which "combines all the best-loved themes of romantic adventure", with a script evoking "everyone's glorious memories of Saturday matinees". The Daily Telegraph's science correspondent Adrian Berry said that Star Wars "is the best such film since 2001 and in certain respects it is one of the most exciting ever made". He described the plot as "unpretentious and pleasantly devoid of any 'message'." A few critics found fault in the film's lack of representation of African Americans. Lucas was taken aback by some of the criticisms, while Lippincott stated, "We have barely dug into this galaxy and what it's like."Gene Siskel, writing for the Chicago Tribune in 1977, said, "What places it a sizable cut above the routine is its spectacular visual effects, the best since Stanley Kubrick's 2001." Andrew Collins of Empire magazine awarded the film five out of five and said, "Star Wars' timeless appeal lies in its easily identified, universal archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the 70s by the special effects, so be it." In his 1977 review, Robert Hatch of The Nation called the film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned. I doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the imitations must already be on the drawing boards." In a more critical review, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader stated, "None of these characters has any depth, and they're all treated like the fanciful props and settings." Peter Keough of the Boston Phoenix said, "Star Wars is a junkyard of cinematic gimcracks not unlike the Jawas' heap of purloined, discarded, barely functioning droids."The film continues to receive critical acclaim from modern critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 137 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.8/10. The website's consensus reads: "A legendarily expansive and ambitious start to the sci-fi saga, George Lucas opened our eyes to the possibilities of blockbuster filmmaking and things have never been the same." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 90 out of 100, based on 24 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". In his 1997 review of the film's 20th anniversary release, Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune gave the film four out of four stars, saying, "A grandiose and violent epic with a simple and whimsical heart." A San Francisco Chronicle staff member described the film as "a thrilling experience". In 2001 Matt Ford of the BBC awarded the film five out of five stars and wrote, "Star Wars isn't the best film ever made, but it is universally loved." CinemaScore reported that audiences for Star Wars's 1999 re-release gave the film a "A+" grade.


=== Accolades ===
The film garnered numerous accolades after its release. Star Wars won six competitive Academy Awards at the 50th Academy Awards: Best Art Direction, Best Costume Design, Best Film Editing, Best Original Score, Best Sound and Best Visual Effects. A Special Achievement for Sound Effects Editing went to sound designer Ben Burtt, and a Scientific and Engineering Award went to John Dykstra for the development of the Dykstraflex Camera (shared with Alvah J. Miller and Jerry Jeffress, who were both granted for the engineering of the Electronic Motion Control System). Additional nominations included Alec Guinness for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, which went to Jason Robards for Julia and George Lucas for Best Original Screenplay, Best Director, and Best Picture, which were instead awarded to Woody Allen's Annie Hall.At the 35th Golden Globe Awards, the film was nominated for Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor (Alec Guinness), and it won the award for Best Score. It received six British Academy Film Awards nominations: Best Film, Best Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Production/Art Design, Best Sound, and Best Score; the film won in the latter two categories. John Williams's soundtrack album won the Grammy Award for Best Album of Original Score for a Motion Picture or Television Program, and the film attained the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.The film also received twelve nominations at the Saturn Awards, winning nine: Best Science Fiction Film, Best Direction, and Best Writing for George Lucas; Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness; Best Music for John Williams; Best Costume for John Mollo; Best Make-up for Rick Baker and Stuart Freeborn; Best Special Effects for John Stears and John Dykstra; and Outstanding Editing for Paul Hirsch, Marcia Lucas, and Richard Chew.


== Post-release ==


=== Theatrical re-releases ===

Star Wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981, and 1982, with the subtitles Episode IV and A New Hope being added in 1981. Kurtz said that Lucas and his creative team had been planning on renaming 'Star Wars' since Empire's production. The film was digitally remastered with some altered scenes in 1997 for a theatrical re-release, dubbed the "Special Edition". Since its original release, the film has also been dubbed and subtitled into numerous languages. In 2010, Lucas announced that all six previously released Star Wars films would be scanned and transferred to 3D for a theatrical release, but only 3D versions of the prequel trilogy were completed before the franchise was sold to Disney in 2012. In 2013, Star Wars was dubbed into Navajo, making it the first major motion picture translated into a Native American language.The subtitles Episode IV and A New Hope were first published on a title page for the film's script in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars, in what Kaminski claims as "outright forgery", remarking that "the script itself wasn't even the authentic revised fourth draft, but more like a transcription of the finished film, edited and combined with the real fourth draft." The title was changed when the film entered re-releases. Official sources state that the change was made at the theatrical re-release of April 10, 1981.The retronymic inclusion of subtitles brought the film into line with the introduction to its sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, which was reconceived during rewrites as "Episode V" and eventually released as such in 1980. Lucas claims this was intended from the beginning, and was only dropped to avoid confusing audiences: "Star Wars was the fourth story in the saga and was to have been called 'Star Wars, Episode Four: A New Hope'." In 2014, Kurtz recalled they had toyed with the idea "of calling it Episode III, IV, or V." Hamill recalls having asked Lucas "Why are we doing episode four?" and being answered that Lucas wanted "to give the audience a feeling that they'd missed something and that they were coming into the middle of this story" or that it was "the most commercial section" of the overriding story. Kaminski, however, points out that all early drafts carry an "Episode One" subtitle, and that even early drafts of the sequel are called "Episode II".


==== Special Edition ====
After ILM began to create CGI for Steven Spielberg's 1993 film Jurassic Park, Lucas decided that digital technology had caught up to his "original vision" for Star Wars. For the film's 20th anniversary in 1997, Star Wars was digitally remastered with some altered scenes and re-released to theaters, along with The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, under the campaign title Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition. This version of the film runs 124 minutes.
The Special Edition contains visual shots and scenes that were unachievable in the original due to financial, technological, and time constraints; one such scene involves a meeting between Han Solo and Jabba the Hutt. The process of creating the new visual effects for Star Wars was featured in the documentary film Special Effects: Anything Can Happen, directed by Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt. Although most changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many fans and critics believe that Lucas degraded the film with the additions. A particularly controversial change in which a bounty hunter named Greedo shoots first when confronting Han Solo has inspired T-shirts bearing the phrase "Han Shot First".Star Wars required extensive recovery of misplaced footage and restoration of the whole film before Lucas's Special Edition modifications could be attempted. It was discovered that in addition to the negative motion picture stocks commonly used on feature films, Lucas had also used Color Reversal Internegative (CRI) film, a reversal stock subsequently discontinued by Kodak. CRI proved to deteriorate faster than negative stocks did, although it theoretically was of higher quality, as it saved two generations (an interpositive followed by an internegative), where employed. Because of this, the entire composited negative had to be disassembled, and the CRI portions cleaned separately from the negative portions. Once the cleaning was complete, the film was scanned into the computer for restoration. In many cases, entire scenes had to be reconstructed from their individual elements. Digital compositing technology allowed the restorers to correct for problems such as misalignment of mattes and "blue-spill".In 1989, the 1977 theatrical version of Star Wars was selected for preservation by the National Film Registry of the United States Library of Congress. 35 mm reels of the 1997 Special Edition were initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical release. By 2015, this copy had been transferred to a 2K scan, now available to be viewed by appointment.Shortly after the release of Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, it was reported that both director Gareth Edwards and J. J. Abrams had seen a 4K restoration of the theatrical version done by Disney themselves. The existence of this restoration has, however, never been officially confirmed by Disney, and in later interviews, Abrams has expressed doubts that any of the original trilogy would be released in their theatrical versions. He has, however, publicly stated that he would definitely like to see them made available again.


=== Home media ===
In the United States, France, West Germany, Italy and Japan, parts of or the whole film were released on Super 8. The whole film was released for all these countries (including subtitled silent editions and an American Spanish-language edition), except for Italy, where the film (titled "Guerre stellari") was released by IE International as eight brief scenes: Battaglia spaziale ("Space battle", the Battle of Yavin), Duello col laser ("Duel with the laser", Obi-Wan and Darth Vader's duel), La cattura dell'astronave ("The capture of the spaceship"), La liberazione di Leia ("Leia's liberation", the adventure on the Death Star), Messaggio dallo spazio ("Message from space", Leia giving R2-D2 the plans), SOS nella galassia ("SOS in the galaxy"), and Trappola mortale ("Deadly trap", the Falcon being captured by the Death Star). A full Super 8 version of the film was only made available in Italy as a pirate six-reel set.Clips were also released for the Movie Viewer toy projector by Kenner Products in cassettes featuring very short scenes, including Assault on Death Star, Battle in Hyperspace, Danger at the Cantina, and Destroy Death Star.Star Wars debuted on Betamax, CED, LaserDisc, Video 2000, and VHS between the 1980s and 1990s by CBS/Fox Video. The final issue of the original theatrical release (pre-Special Edition) to VHS format occurred in 1995, as part of "Last Chance to Own the Original" campaign, available as part of a trilogy set and as a standalone purchase. The film was released for the first time on DVD on September 21, 2004, in a box set with The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of supplementary material. The films were digitally restored and remastered, and more changes were made by Lucas. The DVD features a commentary track from Lucas, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher. The bonus disc contains the documentary Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy, three featurettes, teasers, theatrical trailers, TV spots, still galleries, an exclusive preview of Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, a playable Xbox demo of the LucasArts game Star Wars: Battlefront, and a making-of documentary on the Episode III video game. The set was reissued in December 2005 as part of a three-disc limited edition boxed set without the bonus disc.The trilogy was re-released on separate two-disc limited edition DVD sets from September 12 to December 31, 2006, and again in a limited edition tin box set on November 4, 2008; the original versions of the films were added as bonus material. The release was met with criticism as the unaltered versions were from the 1993 non-anamorphic LaserDisc masters and were not re-transferred using modern video standards. The transfer led to problems with colors and digital image jarring.All six Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011, in three different editions, with A New Hope available in both a box set of the original trilogy and with all six films on Star Wars: The Complete Saga, which includes nine discs and over 40 hours of special features. The original theatrical versions of the films were not included in the box set. New changes were made to the films, provoking mixed responses.On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films. Fox released A New Hope for digital download on April 10, 2015. In December 2016, Rogue One (2016) director Gareth Edwards revealed that Lucasfilm had recently completed a 4K restoration of Star Wars, but did not elaborate on whether the restored version was based on the 1977 original or a subsequent re-release.Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued the film on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019. Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019. This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.


=== Merchandising ===

Little Star Wars merchandise was available for several months after the film's debut, as only Kenner Products had accepted marketing director Charles Lippincott's licensing offers. Kenner responded to the sudden demand for toys by selling boxed vouchers in its "empty box" Christmas campaign. Television commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a "Star Wars Early Bird Certificate Package" could be redeemed for four action figures between February and June 1978. Jay West of the Los Angeles Times said that the boxes in the campaign "became the most coveted empty box[es] in the history of retail." In 2012, the Star Wars action figures were inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame.The novelization of the film was published as Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker in December 1976, six months before the film was released. The credited author was George Lucas, but the book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster. Marketing director Charles Lippincott secured the deal with Del Rey Books to publish the novelization in November 1976. By February 1977, a half million copies had been sold. Foster also wrote the sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978) to be adapted as a low-budget film if Star Wars was not a financial success.Marvel Comics also adapted the film as the first six issues of its licensed Star Wars comic book, with the first issue sold in April 1977. Roy Thomas was the writer and Howard Chaykin was the artist of the adaptation. Like the novelization, it contained certain elements, such as the scene with Luke and Biggs, that appeared in the screenplay but not in the finished film. The series was so successful that, according to Jim Shooter, it "single-handedly saved Marvel". From January to April 1997, Dark Horse Comics, which held the comic rights to Star Wars since 1991, published a comic book adaptation of the "Special Edition" of the film, written by Bruce Jones with art by Eduardo Barreto and Al Williamson; 36 years later, the same company published The Star Wars, an adaptation of the plot from Lucas' original rough draft screenplay, from September 2013 to May 2014.Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set. Released in 1979, the 24-page Star Wars read-along book was accompanied by a 33⅓ rpm 7-inch phonograph record. Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the movie with an abridged and condensed version of the story. The record was produced by Buena Vista Records, and its content was copyrighted by Black Falcon, Ltd., a subsidiary of Lucasfilm "formed to handle the merchandising for Star Wars." The Story of Star Wars was a 1977 record album presenting an abridged version of the events depicted in Star Wars, using dialogue and sound effects from the original film. The recording was produced by George Lucas and Alan Livingston, and was narrated by Roscoe Lee Browne. The script was adapted by E. Jack Kaplan and Cheryl Gard.An audio CD boxed set of the Star Wars radio series was released in 1993, containing the original 1981 radio drama along with the radio adaptations of the sequels, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.


== Legacy and influence ==
Star Wars launched the careers of many of its actors, including Hamill, Ford, Fisher, Mayhew, Daniels, Baker, and Jones. Ford, who subsequently starred in the Indiana Jones series (1981–2023), Blade Runner (1982), and Witness (1985) after working on the film, told the Daily Mirror that Star Wars "boosted my career", and said, "I think the great luck of my career is that I've made these family movies which are introduced to succeeding generations of kids by their families at the time it seems appropriate."The film also spawned the Star Wars Holiday Special, which debuted on CBS on November 17, 1978, and is often considered a failure; Lucas himself disowned it. The special has never been aired after its original broadcast, and it has never been officially released on home video. However, many bootleg copies exist, and the special has consequently become something of an underground legend.


=== In popular culture ===

Star Wars and its ensuing film installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a wide range of media. Hardware Wars, released in 1978, was one of the first fan films to parody Star Wars. It received positive critical reaction, went to earn over $1 million, and is one of Lucas's favorite Star Wars spoofs. Writing for The New York Times, Frank DeCaro said, "Star Wars littered pop culture of the late 1970s with a galaxy of space junk." He cited Quark (a short-lived 1977 sitcom that parodies the science fiction genre) and Donny & Marie (a 1970s variety show that produced a 10-minute musical adaptation of Star Wars guest starring Daniels and Mayhew) as "television's two most infamous examples." Mel Brooks's Spaceballs, a satirical comic science-fiction parody, was released in 1987 to mixed reviews. Lucas permitted Brooks to make a spoof of the film under "one incredibly big restriction: no action figures." In the 1990s and 2000s, animated comedy TV series Family Guy, Robot Chicken, and The Simpsons have produced episodes satirizing the film series. A Nerdist article published in 2021 argues that "Star Wars is the most influential film of all time" partly on the basis that "if all copies ... suddenly vanished, we could more or less recreate the film ... using other media," including parodies.Star Wars, together with Lucas, is the subject of the 2010 documentary film The People vs. George Lucas that details the issues of filmmaking and fanaticism pertaining to the film franchise and its creator. Many elements of the film are prominent in popular culture. The weapon of choice of the Jedi, the lightsaber, was voted as the most popular weapon in film history in a survey of approximately 2,000 film fans. Characters such as Darth Vader, Han Solo, and Yoda are enduringly popular, and all three were named in the top twenty of the British Film Institute's "Best Sci-Fi Characters of All-Time" list. The expressions "Evil empire" and "May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon. A pun on the latter phrase has led to May 4 being regarded by many fans of the franchise as an unofficial Star Wars Day. To commemorate the film's 30th anniversary in May 2007, the United States Postal Service issued a set of 15 stamps depicting the characters of the franchise. Approximately 400 mailboxes across the country were also designed to look like R2-D2.


=== Cinematic influence ===
Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after." It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures. The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon. Along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.Filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by Star Wars include James Cameron, J. J. Abrams, Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Gareth Edwards, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Peter Jackson, Joss Whedon, Christopher Nolan, Ridley Scott, John Singleton, and Kevin Smith. Scott, Cameron, and Jackson were influenced by Lucas's concept of the "used future" (where vehicles and culture are obviously dated) and extended the concept for their films, such as Scott's science-fiction films Alien (1979) and Blade Runner (1982), Cameron's acclaimed sequel Aliens (1986), and his earlier breakthrough film The Terminator (1984). Jackson used the concept for his production of The Lord of the Rings trilogy to add a sense of realism and believability. Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film, Inception.Some critics have blamed Star Wars, as well as Jaws, for ruining Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy. On a late 1977 episode of Sneak Previews, Siskel expressed concern that, "It's so successful and so mindless fun that I hope Hollywood doesn't forget that there are people who like to see serious pictures too." Another critic, Peter Biskind, later complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies... They marched backward through the looking-glass." In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth."


=== Recognition ===
In its May 30, 1977, issue, Time magazine named Star Wars the "Movie of the Year". The publication said it was a "big early supporter" of the vision which would become Star Wars. In an article intended for the cover of the issue, Time's Gerald Clarke wrote that Star Wars is "a grand and glorious film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the best movie of the year so far. The result is a remarkable confection: a subliminal history of the movies, wrapped in a riveting tale of suspense and adventure, ornamented with some of the most ingenious special effects ever contrived for film." Each of the subsequent films of the Star Wars saga has appeared on the magazine's cover.

Star Wars was voted the second most popular film by Americans in a 2008 nationwide poll conducted by the market research firm, Harris Interactive. Star Wars has also been featured in several high-profile audience polls: In 1997, it ranked as the 10th Greatest American Film on the Los Angeles Daily News Readers' Poll; in 2002, the film and its sequel The Empire Strikes Back were voted the greatest films ever made in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Films poll; in 2011, it ranked as Best Sci-Fi Film on Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time, a primetime special aired by ABC that counted down the best films as chosen by fans, based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People magazine; and in 2014, the film placed 11th in a poll undertaken by The Hollywood Reporter, which balloted every studio, agency, publicity firm, and production house in the Hollywood region.Reputable publications also have included Star Wars in their best films lists: in 2008, Empire magazine ranked Star Wars at No. 22 on its list of the "500 Greatest Movies of All Time"; in 2010, the film ranked among the "All-Time 100" list of the greatest films as chosen by Time magazine film critic Richard Schickel; the film was also placed on a similar list created by The New York Times, "The New York Times Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made"; in 2012, the film was included in Sight & Sound's prestigious decennial critics poll "Critics' Top 250 Films", ranking at 171st on the list, and in their directors poll at 224th.Lucas's original screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time. In 1989, the United States Library of Congress named Star Wars among its first selections to the National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"; at the time, it was the most recent film to be selected and it was the only film from the 1970s to be chosen. Although Lucas declined to provide the Library with a workable copy of the original film upon request (instead offering the Special Edition), a viewable scan was made of the original copyright deposit print. In 1991, Star Wars was one of the first 25 films inducted into the Producers Guild of America's Hall of Fame for setting "an enduring standard for American entertainment." The soundtrack was added to the United States National Recording Registry 15 years later (in 2004). The lack of a commercially available version of the 1977 original theatrical edit of the film since early '80s VHS releases has spawned numerous restorations by disgruntled fans over the years, such as Harmy's Despecialized Edition.In addition to the film's multiple awards and nominations, Star Wars has also been recognized by the American Film Institute on several of its lists. The film ranks first on 100 Years of Film Scores, second on Top 10 Sci-Fi Films, 15th on 100 Years...100 Movies (ranked 13th on the updated 10th-anniversary edition), 27th on 100 Years...100 Thrills, and 39th on 100 Years...100 Cheers. In addition, the quote "May the Force be with you" is ranked eighth on 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes, and Han Solo and Obi-Wan Kenobi are ranked as the 14th and 37th greatest heroes respectively on 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains.


== Adaptations, sequels, and prequels ==

A radio drama adaptation of the film was broadcast on the American National Public Radio network in 1981. The adaptation was written by Brian Daley and directed by John Madden, and was produced with cooperation from George Lucas, who donated the rights to NPR. Williams's music and Burtt's sound design were retained for the show, and Hamill and Daniels reprised their roles. The radio drama narrative began with a version of the backstory to the film, which relates Princess Leia's acquisition of the secret Death Star plans. It also featured scenes not seen in the final cut of the film, such as Luke Skywalker's observation of the space battle above Tatooine through binoculars, a skyhopper race, and Vader's interrogation of Princess Leia. The radio version was originally considered to be part of the official Star Wars canon, but has since been supplanted by revised canonical narratives.Star Wars was followed by The Empire Strikes Back in 1980 and Return of the Jedi in 1983, which concludes the original film trilogy. The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi continue the backstory of the original trilogy. Like the previous film, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi were a financial success and fared well with critics, as the original trilogy is considered one of the best film trilogies in history.22 years after the release of Star Wars, Lucas wrote and directed the prequel trilogy, consisting of the films The Phantom Menace (1999), Attack of the Clones (2002), and Revenge of the Sith (2005). The films chronicle the history between Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker, and the latter's fall to the dark side and transformation into Darth Vader. The prequel trilogy was financially successful, and polarized critics and fans on their release for the storylines and some new characters. After Lucas sold the Star Wars franchise to The Walt Disney Company in 2012, Disney developed a sequel trilogy, consisting of The Force Awakens (2015), The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019). Original trilogy cast including Ford, Hamill, and Fisher reprised their roles, alongside new characters portrayed by Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Adam Driver, and Oscar Isaac. Standalone films and television series have also been released, exploring adventures set around the main trilogy arcs.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Works cited ==


== Further reading ==
Paul Duncan (2020): The Star Wars Archives. 1977–1983, Taschen GmbH; Anniversary edition, ISBN 978-3836581172
George Lucas (Alan Dean Foster), Donald F. Glut & James Kahn (2017): Star Wars: Original Trilogy (Novelizations), Arrow, ISBN 978-1784759384
Bailey, T. J. (2005). Devising a Dream: A Book of Star Wars Facts and Production Timeline. Louisville, KY: Wasteland Press. ISBN 1-933265-55-8.
Blackman, W. Haden (2004). The New Essential Guide to Weapons and Technology, Revised Edition (Star Wars). New York: Del Rey. ISBN 0-345-44903-7.
Eagan, Daniel (2010). "Star Wars", America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, pp. 740–741. A&C Black. ISBN 0826429777.
Steven A. Galipeau (2001). The Journey of Luke Skywalker: An Analysis of Modern Myth and Symbol, Open Court, ISBN 978-0812694321
Sansweet, Stephen (1992). Star Wars: From Concept to Screen to Collectible. San Francisco: Chronicle Books. ISBN 0-8118-0101-2.
Seitz, Matt Zoller (200). "Star Wars", The A List: The National Society of Film Critics' 100 Essential Films — via National Film Registry.
Westfahl, Gary (2000). Space and Beyond: The Frontier Theme in Science Fiction. California: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-30846-8.


== External links ==

Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars at AllMovie
Star Wars at the American Film Institute Catalog
Star Wars, Episode IV: A New Hope (1977) at Filmsite.org
Star Wars at IMDb 
Star Wars at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars at Rotten Tomatoes
Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki12 Monkeys
1:42.08
2000X
2001: A Space Odyssey
2001: A Space Odyssey (film)
2010: The Year We Make Contact
20th Century-Fox
20th Century Fox Home Entertainment
20th Century Fox Records
2K resolution
30th Directors Guild of America Awards
30th Writers Guild of America Awards
32nd British Academy Film Awards
35 mm movie film
35th Golden Globe Awards
3D film
4K Ultra HD Blu-ray
4K resolution
501st Legion
50th Academy Awards
5th Saturn Awards
6-18-67
633 Squadron
A.I. Artificial Intelligence
AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers
AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)
AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills
AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores
AFI's 10 Top 10
AFI 100 Years... series
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Boy and His Dog (1975 film)
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Disturbance in the Force
A Hard Day's Night (film)
A Matter of Time (film)
A New Hope
A New Hope (disambiguation)
About.com
About Schmidt
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Sound Editing
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Academy Awards
Academy Scientific and Technical Award
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Adam Driver
Admiral Ackbar
Admiral Motti
Admiral Piett
Adrian Berry, 4th Viscount Camrose
Advance Publications
Advertising agency
African Americans
Ahsoka (TV series)
Akira Kurosawa
Al Pacino
Aladdin (1992 Disney film)
Alan Dean Foster
Alan Ladd Jr.
Alaskan Malamute
Alderaan
Alec Guinness
Alessandro Cicognini
Alex McCrindle
Alex Raymond
Alfie Curtis
Alfonso Cuarón
Alien (film)
Alien Nation (film)
Aliens (film)
AllMovie
All Good Things... (Star Trek: The Next Generation)
All Things Considered
Amadeus (film)
American Broadcasting Company
American Cinematographer
American Film Institute
American Graffiti
American Heritage (magazine)
American Music Award for Favorite Pop/Rock Album
American Music Awards of 1978
American Sniper
American Society of Cinematographers
American Splendor (film)
American Zoetrope
Amour (2012 film)
Amy Irving
Anamorphic format
Andor (TV series)
Andor (soundtrack)
Andrew Stanton
Anjelica Huston
Annie Hall
Anniversary
Anthony Breznican
Anthony Daniels
Anyone Lived in a Pretty How Town (film)
Apocalypse Now
Apollo 11
Arizona State University
Armageddon (1998 film)
Arrakis
Arrival (film)
Astrel
Atlantic City (1980 film)
Attack of the Clones
Audacy
Audio drama
Avatar (2009 film)
Avengers: Endgame
Avro Lancaster
BAFTA
BAFTA Award for Best Costume Design
BAFTA Award for Best Editing
BAFTA Award for Best Film
BAFTA Award for Best Film Music
BAFTA Award for Best Original Music
BAFTA Award for Best Production Design
BAFTA Award for Best Sound
BBC
B movie
Babylon 5
Back to the Future
Backstory
Bad Boys for Life
Bail Organa
Bald: The Making of THX 1138
Ballantine Books
Bandwagon effect
Barry Norman
Basic Books
Batman (1989 film)
Beasts of the Southern Wild
Ben Burtt
Bene Gesserit
Benh Zeitlin
Beowulf
Beru Lars
Betamax
Beverly Hills Cop
Bib Fortuna
Bicycle Thieves
Biggs Darklighter
Bill Murray
Billboard
Black Hole of Calcutta
Black Panther (film)
Blade Runner
Blade Runner 2049
Blockbuster (2004 book)
Blockbuster (entertainment)
Bloomberg Businessweek
Blu-ray
Bob Minkler
Boba Fett
Book-and-record set
Bouncing bomb
Box Office Mojo
Boxed set
Boxoffice (magazine)
Boyhood (2014 film)
Brazil (1985 film)
Brendan McCarthy
Brian Daley
Brian De Palma
Brian Johnson (special effects artist)
British Academy Film Awards
British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Brokeback Mountain
Brothers Grimm
Brothers Hildebrandt
Bruno Bettelheim
Bugsy
Burt Reynolds
C-3PO
CBS
CBS/Fox Video
CBS Evening News
CNET
CNN
Call Me by Your Name (film)
Cannes Film Festival
Cantina
Capacitance Electronic Disc
Captain EO
Caravan of Courage: An Ewok Adventure
Carl Sagan
Carrie (1976 film)
Carrie Fisher
Chain reaction
Changes in Star Wars re-releases
Channel 4
Character actor
Charles Martin Smith
Charley Lippincott
Chattanooga Times Free Press
Chevy Chase
Chewbacca
Chewbacca defense
Chicago Reader
Chicago Sun-Times
Chicago Tribune
Children of Men
China Lake Acres, California
Chott el Djerid
Christopher Lee
Christopher Nolan
Christopher Walken
Cindy Williams
CinemaBlend
CinemaScore
Cinema Treasures
Citizen Kane
Classic Creatures: Return of the Jedi
Classical Hollywood cinema
Clone Wars (Star Wars)
Close-up
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Cloverfield
Colin Cantwell
Collider (website)
ComicBook.com
Comic Book Resources
Comic science-fiction
Coming Home (1978 film)
Comparison of Star Trek and Star Wars
Computer-generated imagery
Contact (1997 American film)
Corellia
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon
Cultural impact of Star Wars
Cybill Shepherd
DVD
Daily Mirror
Daily Variety
Daisy Ridley
Damon Lindelof
Dan Perri
Daniels (directors)
Dark City (1998 film)
Dark Horse Comics
Darth Vader
David Fincher
David Lynch
David Prowse
De Havilland Mosquito
Dean Devlin
Death Star
Death Star (business)
Death Valley
Del Rey Books
Deleted scene
Den of Geek
Denis Lawson
Denis Villeneuve
Dennis Publishing
Derek Ball
Derek Malcolm
Desert planet
Digital distribution
Dino De Laurentiis
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Discovery One
Disney+
Disney Wish
District 9
Do the Right Thing
Doctor Who
Dog Day Afternoon
Dogfight
Dolby Atmos
Don Henderson
Don MacDougall
Donny & Marie (1976 TV series)
Dr. Evazan
Dr. Strangelove
Drew Struzan
Drive My Car (film)
Droid (Star Wars)
Dubbing (filmmaking)
Duel of the Fates
Dune
Dune (1984 film)
Dune (novel)
Dwarf (Germanic mythology)
Dykstraflex
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
Eddie Byrne
Edgar Rice Burroughs
EditDroid
Edutopia
Edward Scissorhands
Edwin Lester Arnold
Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 4EB
Elstree Studios
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Empire (magazine)
Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy
Entertainment Weekly
Epic film
Eric Heisserer
Erich Wolfgang Korngold
Esquire (magazine)
Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Ewok Celebration
Ewoks: The Battle for Endor
Ewoks (TV series)
Ewoks (soundtrack)
Extra-vehicular activity
ExtraTERRORestrial Alien Encounter
Fairy tale
Family Guy
Fan (person)
Fan edit
Fandango Media
Fandom, Inc.
Fantastic art
Farrah Fawcett
Fascism
Fictional universe
Film... (TV programme)
FilmAffinity
Film School Rejects
Film Threat
Film frame
Film poster
Film title design
Film treatment
Filmmaker (film)
Filmsite.org
Final cut privilege
Fjord
Flash Gordon
Flash Gordon (serial)
Floor plan
Force Trainer
Foreshortening
Forrest Gump
Fran Walsh
Francis Ford Coppola
Frank DeCaro
Frank Herbert
Freedom fighter
Freiheit (film)
Fremen
Fritz Lang
From Star Wars to Jedi: The Making of a Saga
GRASS programming language
Galactic Empire (Star Wars)
Galactic Republic
Galaxy Quest
GamesRadar
GamesRadar+
Gannett Company
Gareth Edwards
Gareth Edwards (director)
Gareth Wigan
Garrick Hagon
Gary Kurtz
Geena Davis
Gene Siskel
Gene Wilder
General Tagge
Geoffrey Unsworth
George Lucas
George Lucas bibliography
George Lucas filmography
George Miller (filmmaker)
Gerald Clarke (author)
Get Out
Ghostwriter
Gilbert Taylor
Glenn Close
Gloria Katz
Gold (color)
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Gone with the Wind (film)
Good Housekeeping
Good Omens (TV series)
Goodfellas
Grammy Award
Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media
Grand Moff Tarkin
Grant McCune
Gravity (2013 film)
Grease (film)
Greedo
Gregg Toland
Guardians of the Galaxy (film)
Guillermo del Toro
Guinness World Records
Hal Barwood
Halogen lamp
Hammer Film Productions
Han Solo
Han shot first
Hannah and Her Sisters
Hardware Wars
Harlan Ellison
Harmy's Despecialized Edition
Harris Insights & Analytics
Harrison Ford
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (film)
Hayao Miyazaki
Hearst Corporation
Heavy water
Helvetica
Her (film)
Herbie (film)
Hermit
Hertfordshire
High-concept
High-dynamic-range video
Highest-grossing films adjusted for inflation
History (U.S. TV channel)
HitFix
Hollywood.com
Holographic
Home Alone
Hope and Glory (film)
How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000 film)
Howard Chaykin
Howard Roffman
Howard the Duck (film)
Howl's Moving Castle (film)
Huffington Post
Hugo Award
Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation
Hypertension
IGN
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
In the Bedroom
Inception
Independence Day (1996 film)
Independent film
Indiana Jones
Indiana Jones (character)
Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny
Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade
Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom
Indigenous languages of the Americas
Industrial Light & Magic
Ingmar Bergman
Intergalactic Krewe of Chewbacchus
Internegative
Interstellar (film)
Io9
Iron Man (2008 film)
J. J. Abrams
J. Michael Straczynski
J. R. R. Tolkien
J. W. Rinzler
Jabba the Hutt
Jac Schaeffer
Jack Nicholson
Jack Purvis (actor)
James Caan
James Cameron
James Earl Jones
James George Frazer
James Gunn
James Schamus
Jan Dodonna
Jane Seymour (actress)
Jarret Myer
Jason Robards
Jawas
Jaws (film)
Jay Cocks
Jedi
Jedi Master
Jedi Training: Trials of the Temple
Jedi census phenomenon
Jedi mind trick
Jediism
Jessica Lange
Jim Reardon
Jim Shooter
Jodie Foster
John Barry (set designer)
John Boyega
John Carter of Mars (collection)
John Dykstra
John Jympson
John Lasseter
John Madden (director)
John Milius
John Mollo
John Simon (critic)
John Singleton
John Stears
John Wayne
John Williams
Johnny Vaughan
Jonathan Rosenbaum
Jonás Cuarón
Jordan Peele
Joseph Campbell
Joss Whedon
Jules Verne
Julia (1977 film)
Jungle
Jurassic Park (film)
KCBS (AM)
Karen Allen
Kathleen Kennedy (producer)
Kathleen Turner
Kelsey Grammer
Kenner Products
Kenner Star Wars action figures
Kenny Baker (English actor)
Kensal Green
Kerner Optical
Kevin Smith
Kim Basinger
King Arthur
Kings Row
Kojak
Koo Stark
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kurt Russell
L.A. Confidential (film)
Labyrinth (1986 film)
Lando Calrissian
Larry Cuba
LaserDisc
Latino (film)
Laugh It Up, Fuzzball: The Family Guy Trilogy
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leaving Las Vegas
Lego Star Wars
Lego Star Wars: Droid Tales
Lego Star Wars: The Freemaker Adventures
Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises
Lego Star Wars II: The Original Trilogy
Leicester Square Theatre
Les Fresholtz
Leslie Dilley
Leslie Schofield
Letters from Iwo Jima
Lew Wasserman
Library of Congress
Libyan
Lieut. Gullivar Jones: His Vacation
Light & Magic (TV series)
Lightsaber
Linda Purl
List of 1977 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1978 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1979 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1980 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1981 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1982 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1983 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1984 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1985 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1986 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1987 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1988 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1989 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1990 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1991 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1992 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1993 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1994 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1995 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1996 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1997 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1998 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1999 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2000 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2001 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2002 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2003 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2004 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2005 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2006 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2007 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2008 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2009 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2010 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2011 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2012 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2013 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2014 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2015 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2016 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2017 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2018 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2019 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2020 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2021 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2022 box office number-one films in the United States
List of Kenner Star Wars action figures
List of Lucasfilm productions
List of Robot Chicken episodes
List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters
List of Star Wars: The Clone Wars cast members
List of Star Wars: The Clone Wars episodes
List of Star Wars Legends characters
List of Star Wars Rebels characters
List of Star Wars Rebels episodes
List of Star Wars artists
List of Star Wars books
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars comic books
List of Star Wars comics
List of Star Wars film actors
List of Star Wars filming locations
List of Star Wars films
List of Star Wars reference books
List of Star Wars television series
List of Star Wars television series actors
List of Star Wars theme parks attractions
List of Star Wars video games
List of The Book of Boba Fett characters
List of The Mandalorian characters
List of World War II films
List of accolades received by Star Wars: The Force Awakens
List of accolades received by Star Wars (film franchise)
List of awards and nominations received by George Lucas
List of films considered the best
List of highest-grossing films
List of highest-grossing films in Canada and the United States
List of highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada
List of highest-grossing films in the United States by year
List of organisms named after the Star Wars series
Lists of Star Wars cast members
Little Dorrit (1987 film)
Logan's Run (film)
Logotype
London Symphony Orchestra
Look at Life (film)
Los Angeles
Los Angeles Daily News
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Los Angeles Times
Lost (2004 TV series)
Lubbock Avalanche-Journal
LucasArts
Lucas Museum of Narrative Art
Lucasfilm
Lucasfilm Animation
Lucasfilm Games
Lucky Lady
Lucy Alibar
Luke Skywalker
M. Night Shyamalan
Mad Max: Fury Road
Major motion picture
Maniac Mansion (TV series)
Mann's Chinese Theatre
Mann Theatres
Marcia Lucas
Mark Hamill
Marquee (sign)
Martin Scorsese
Marvel Comics
Maschinenmensch
Master shot
Matmata, Tunisia
Matt Zoller Seitz
Matthew Robbins (screenwriter)
Maxim (magazine)
May the Force be with you
Maya civilization
Mel Blanc
Mel Brooks
Melange (fictional drug)
Memorial Day
Men in Black (1997 film)
Meryl Streep
Metacritic
Metaphysical
Metro (British newspaper)
Metropolis (1927 film)
Michael Leader
Michael Minkler
Michael Schur
Microphone
Middle East
Millennium Falcon
Minority Report (film)
Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters
Mon (emblem)
Mon Mothma
Moonlight (2016 film)
More American Graffiti
Morris Communications
Mos Eisley
Motion Picture Association
Motion control photography
Movie projector
Muammar Gaddafi
Music of Star Wars
Mystical
NPR
Nafta, Tunisia
National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences
National Film Registry
National Recording Registry
National Toy Hall of Fame
Navajo language
Nebula Award for Best Script
Neil Gaiman
Neill Blomkamp
Nerdist
Network (1976 film)
New Hollywood
New Journal and Guide
New Statesman
New York, New York (1977 film)
New York (magazine)
New York City
New York Daily News
Nick Nolte
Nico Lathouris
Nicole Perlman
Nien Nunb
Nixon
Nope (film)
Norman Reynolds
Northpoint Theatre
Novelization
OCLC (identifier)
Obi-Wan Kenobi
Obi-Wan Kenobi (TV series)
Obi-Wan Kenobi (soundtrack)
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Operation Chastise
Orson Welles
Oscar Isaac
Owen Lars
Palpatine
Pan's Labyrinth
Paramount Pictures
Parasite (2019 film)
Patrick Jordan
Paul Blake (actor)
Paul Hirsch (film editor)
Pauline Kael
People (magazine)
Perry King
Pete Docter
Peter Biskind
Peter Bogdanovich
Peter Cushing
Peter Jackson
Peter Mayhew
Phil Brown (actor)
Phil Lord and Christopher Miller
Philippa Boyens
Philippines
Phoenix Media/Communications Group
Phonograph record
Photographic filter
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
Pitch (filmmaking)
Pixar
PopMatters
Post-production
Premiere (magazine)
Princess Leia
Princess Leia Organa
Principal photography
Producers Guild of America
Prometheus Global Media
Pulp Fiction
Quark (TV series)
R2-D2
Radioland Murders
Raging Bull
Raiders of the Lost Ark
Rain Man
Ralph McQuarrie
Ray Bradbury Award
Ray West
Raymus Antilles
Ready Player One (film)
Realism (arts)
Rebel Alliance
Rebel Legion
Red Tails
Retronym
Return of the Jedi
Return of the Jedi: Death Star Battle
Return of the Jedi (novel)
Return of the Jedi (soundtrack)
Reuters
Revenge of the Sith
Review aggregator
Richard Chew
Richard Clark (director)
Richard Dreyfuss
Richard Edlund
Richard LeParmentier
Richard Portman
Richard Schickel
Rick Baker
Ridley Scott
Rise of the Planet of the Apes
Robby Benson
Robert Blalack
Robert De Niro
Robert Gordon (screenwriter)
Robert Rutledge
Robert Watts
RoboCop
Robot Chicken
Rocky
Rodney Rothman
Roger Christian (filmmaker)
Roger Corman
Roger Ebert
Rogue Not Quite One
Rogue One
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story
Rogue One (soundtrack)
Roland Emmerich
Rollerball (1975 film)
Rolling Stone
Roma (2018 film)
Roscoe Lee Browne
Rotten Tomatoes
Rough cut
Roy Thomas
Royal Air Force
Royalties
Ruhr
SFGATE
SP FX: The Empire Strikes Back
Sahara
Samurai
San Diego Comic-Con International
San Francisco Chronicle
Sanjuro
Saturn Award
Saturn Award for Best Actor
Saturn Award for Best Actress
Saturn Award for Best Costume
Saturn Award for Best Costume Design
Saturn Award for Best Director
Saturn Award for Best Make-up
Saturn Award for Best Music
Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film
Saturn Award for Best Special Effects
Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor
Saturn Award for Best Writing
Saturn Awards
Saving Private Ryan
Schindler's List
Science-fiction fandom
Science-fiction film
Science fantasy
Science fiction
Science of Star Wars (miniseries)
Scrap
Screen Rant
Scuba set
Second unit
Secrets & Lies (film)
Serenity (2005 film)
Severed Dreams
Shadow Dawn
Shadow Moon (novel)
Shadow Star (novel)
Shelagh Fraser
Shepperton Design Studios
Shepperton Studios
Shrek 2
Sideways
Sidney Sheldon
Sight & Sound
Sigourney Weaver
Simon & Schuster
Sissy Spacek
Sitcom
Skywalker Ranch
Skywalker Saga
Skywalker Sound
Slaughterhouse-Five (film)
Sleeper (1973 film)
Small Axe (anthology)
Smokey and the Bandit
Sneak Previews
Solo: A Star Wars Story
Solo: A Star Wars Story (soundtrack)
Sorcerer (film)
SoundDroid
Sound designer
Sound stage
Soylent Green
Space: 1999
Space Janitors
Space opera
Space station
Spaceballs
Spanish-language
Special Achievement Academy Award
Special Effects: Anything Can Happen
Special effect
Special effects of The Empire Strikes Back
Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse
Spider-Man: No Way Home
Spider-Man (2002 film)
Spider-Man 3
Splinter of the Mind's Eye
Spotlight (film)
St. Martin's Press
StageCraft
Stan Freberg
Stanley Kauffmann
Stanley Kubrick
Stanley R. Greenberg
StarWars.com
Star Destroyer
Star Tours
Star Tours – The Adventures Continue
Star Trek: The Next Generation
Star Trek: The Original Series
Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country
Star Wars
Star Wars: A Galactic Spectacular
Star Wars: Battlefront
Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003 TV series)
Star Wars: Droids
Star Wars: Duel of the Fates
Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith
Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (soundtrack)
Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (video game)
Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones
Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (soundtrack)
Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace
Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace (soundtrack)
Star Wars: Flight of the Falcon
Star Wars: Force for Change
Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker
Star Wars: Galactic Starcruiser
Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge
Star Wars: In Concert
Star Wars: Jedi Arena
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (series)
Star Wars: Millennium Falcon – Smugglers Run
Star Wars: Path of the Jedi
Star Wars: Return of the Jedi: Ewok Adventure
Star Wars: Return of the Jedi (1984 video game)
Star Wars: Rise of the Resistance
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire
Star Wars: Skeleton Crew
Star Wars: The Bad Batch
Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)
Star Wars: The Clone Wars (film)
Star Wars: The Clone Wars (soundtrack)
Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back (1982 video game)
Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back (1985 video game)
Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back (1992 video game)
Star Wars: The Force Awakens
Star Wars: The Force Awakens (soundtrack)
Star Wars: The Force Unleashed (project)
Star Wars: The High Republic
Star Wars: The Last Jedi
Star Wars: The Last Jedi (soundtrack)
Star Wars: The Legacy Revealed
Star Wars: The Old Republic
Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker
Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (soundtrack)
Star Wars: The Vintage Collection
Star Wars: Visions
Star Wars: Where Science Meets Imagination
Star Wars: Yoda Stories
Star Wars: Young Jedi Adventures
Star Wars (1977 comic book)
Star Wars (1983 video game)
Star Wars (1987 video game)
Star Wars (1991 video game)
Star Wars (Main Title)
Star Wars (manga)
Star Wars (radio)
Star Wars (radio series)
Star Wars (soundtrack)
Star Wars Arcade
Star Wars Celebration
Star Wars Day
Star Wars Detours
Star Wars Forces of Destiny
Star Wars Galaxies
Star Wars Holiday Special
Star Wars Hyperspace Mountain
Star Wars Insider
Star Wars Launch Bay
Star Wars Legends
Star Wars Pez
Star Wars Rebels
Star Wars Resistance
Star Wars Tech
Star Wars Theme/Cantina Band
Star Wars Transformers
Star Wars Trilogy: Apprentice of the Force
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade
Star Wars Weekends
Star Wars canon
Star Wars comics
Star Wars fandom
Star Wars in other media
Star Wars opening crawl
Star Wars original trilogy
Star Wars prequel trilogy
Star Wars sequel trilogy
Star Wars sources and analogues
Star Wars trading card
Star Wars video games
Stargate (film)
Stephen Larsen
Stephen Sinclair
Steve Martin
Steven Spielberg
Stop-motion
Stormtrooper (Star Wars)
Storyboard
Strange Magic (film)
Strategic Defense Initiative
Stuart Freeborn
Stylized
Subtitle
Subtitle (titling)
Sun-Times Media Group
Super 8 film
Super Star Wars
Super Star Wars: Return of the Jedi
Super Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back
Superman (1978 film)
Superman II
Suzy Rice
Sylvester Stallone
Synthesizer
T-shirt
THX
THX 1138
TIE fighter
Tales of the Jedi (TV series)
Tarzan
Tatooine
Taxi Driver
Terminator 2: Judgment Day
Terms of Endearment
Terri Nunn
Terri Tatchell
TheForce.Net
TheWrap
The Acolyte (TV series)
The Art of Star Wars
The Atlantic
The Avengers (2012 film)
The Big Breakfast
The Birth of a Nation
The Book of Boba Fett
The Bridges at Toko-Ri
The City on the Edge of Forever
The Coming of Shadows
The Daily Telegraph
The Dallas Morning News
The Dam Busters (film)
The Dark Knight
The Deep (1977 film)
The Descendants
The Directors Company
The Doctor's Wife
The Emperor (film)
The Empire Strikes Back
The Empire Strikes Back (novel)
The Empire Strikes Back (soundtrack)
The Exorcist (film)
The Force
The Force Awakens
The Force Awakens from Its Nap
The Gazette (Colorado Springs)
The Godfather
The Golden Bough
The Good Place
The Great Movies
The Guardian
The Hero with a Thousand Faces
The Hidden Fortress
The Hobbit
The Hollywood Reporter
The Huffington Post
The Hunger Games: Catching Fire
The Hurt Locker
The Imperial March
The Incredible Shrinking Man
The Independent
The Inner Light (Star Trek: The Next Generation)
The Insider (film)
The Jerusalem Post
The Land Before Time (film)
The Last Jedi
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
The Lord of the Rings (film series)
The Making of Star Wars
The Mandalorian
The Mandalorian (season 1)
The Mandalorian (season 2)
The Mandalorian (season 3)
The Matrix
The McClatchy Company
The Menagerie (Star Trek: The Original Series)
The Modesto Bee
The Nation
The New Republic
The New York Observer
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Numbers (website)
The Other Side of Midnight
The Other Side of Midnight (film)
The People vs. George Lucas
The Phantom Menace
The Phoenix (newspaper)
The Princess Bride (film)
The Rise of Skywalker
The Saga Begins
The Seventh Tower
The Simpsons
The Six Million Dollar Man
The Sixth Sense
The Social Network
The StarPhoenix
The Star Wars Corporation
The Story of Star Wars
The Terminator
The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson
The Truman Show
The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)
The Uses of Enchantment
The Walt Disney Company
The Washington Post
The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)
The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles
The Zone of Interest (film)
There Will Be Blood
Thrawn trilogy
Three Men and a Baby
Tikal
Time (magazine)
Time Inc.
Timeline of highest-grossing films
Titanic (1997 film)
Tom Chantrell
Tom Jung
Tom Shone
Top Gun
Top Gun: Maverick
Toshiro Mifune
Total Recall (1990 film)
Town & Country (magazine)
Toy Story
Toy Story 3
Tozeur
Tractor beam
Travel agency
Tribune Publishing
Trinity Mirror
Tucker: The Man and His Dream
Tunisia
Turner Classic Movies
Tusken Raiders
Twice Upon a Time (1983 film)
Tár
USA Today
Unforgiven
United Artists
United States Postal Service
Universal Studios
Upworthy
VHS
Van Nuys
Vanishing point
Vanity Fair (magazine)
Variety (magazine)
Variety show
Vector General
Vector monitor
Vice (magazine)
Video 2000
Vietnam War
Vincent Canby
Vincente Minnelli
Vinylmation
Visual effects
Voice actor
WALL-E
Walt Disney Pictures
Walt Disney Records
Walt Disney Studios (division)
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment
Walter Cronkite
Walter Grauman
WandaVision
Wang Hui-ling
War film
Wedge Antilles
Weighted average
West Country English
Whenever You're Ready (The Good Place)
Who Framed Roger Rabbit
Wicket W. Warrick
Wikimedia Commons
Will Seltzer
Willard Huyck
William Friedkin
William Katt
Willow (1988 film)
Willow (TV series)
Willow (franchise)
Wipe (transition)
Wired (website)
Witness (1985 film)
Woody Allen
Wookiee
Wookieepedia
WorldCat
World War II
Wrapports
Writers Guild of America
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Original Screenplay
Wullf Yularen
X-Men (film)
X-wing fighter
X2 (film)
Xbox (console)
Yahoo! Movies
Yavin
Yavin 4
Yoda
Yoda conditions
Yojimbo (film)
YouTube
Young Frankenstein
Yuri Rasovsky
Zoo
http://www.filmsite.org/starw.html
http://www.afi.com/100years/cheers.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20060508222750/http://www.premiere.com/article.asp?section_id=6&article_id=2164
http://www.premiere.com/article.asp?section_id=6&article_id=2164
https://web.archive.org/web/20100806182036/http://www.cinematical.com/2010/08/05/imagine-that-sly-stallone-auditioned-for-han-solo/
http://www.cinematical.com/2010/08/05/imagine-that-sly-stallone-auditioned-for-han-solo/
https://web.archive.org/web/20051225112859/http://scifi.about.com/od/starwarsfaqs/f/swburtreynolds.htm
http://scifi.about.com/od/starwarsfaqs/f/swburtreynolds.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20110226234811/http://www.starwarsaficionado.com/princessjodie.html
http://www.starwarsaficionado.com/princessjodie.html
http://uproxx.com/gammasquad/2013/04/peter-cushing-a-life-in-film-is-a-genre-geeks-dream/
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6679425.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20061111180214/http://www.starwars.com/bio/anthonydaniels.html
http://metro.co.uk/2009/10/27/kenny-baker-240855/
https://web.archive.org/web/20060509070614/http://movies.yahoo.com/movie/contributor/1800050737/bio
http://time.com/4153583/star-wars-the-years-best-movie/
http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/starwars/behind/pg1.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20071224155643/http://www.starwarz.com/starkiller/writings/development_jan.htm
http://www.starwarz.com/starkiller/writings/development_jan.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20060628065925/http://www.starwarz.com/starkiller/scripts.htm
http://starwarz.com/starkiller/scripts.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20080619110633/http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/7330268/the_force_behind_star_wars
https://web.archive.org/web/20050523010314/http://www.suntimes.com/output/pearlman/sho-sunday-star15-lucas.html
http://www.suntimes.com/output/pearlman/sho-sunday-star15-lucas.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20120510000221/http://www.ralphmcquarrie.com/interviews/insider_76/index.html
http://www.ralphmcquarrie.com/interviews/insider_76/index.html
http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/starwars/behind/pg2.htm
http://www.esquire.com/blogs/culture/star-wars-roger-christian
https://web.archive.org/web/20060822121213/http://www.starwars.com/bio/industriallightmagic.html
http://www.theasc.com/magazine/feb06/taylor/page3.html
http://www.americanheritage.com/entertainment/articles/web/20060525-star-wars-george-lucas-movies-hollywood-luke-skywalker-darth-vader-american-graffiti-science
http://www.theasc.com/magazine/feb06/taylor/page4.html
http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/starwars/behind/pg3.htm
http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/starwars/behind/pg4.htm
http://www.history.com/minisites/starwarslegacy/
http://www.transmitmedia.com/svr/burtt/index.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20100326072227/http://www.starwars.com/episode-iv/bts/article/f20070601/index.html
http://www.afi.com/100years/scores.aspx
http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2010/03/23/star-wars-speed-and-other-movies-inspired-by-akira-kurosawa-on-his-100th-birthday/
http://www.dahoudek.com/pages/starwarsdune.htm
http://www.musicweb-international.com/film/2005/Sum05/633sqdrn.html
http://www.currybet.net/cbet_blog/2009/02/how-accurate-was-kubricks-2001.php
http://herocomplex.latimes.com/movies/star-wars-was-born-a-long-time-ago-but-not-all-that-far-far-away-in-1972-filmmakers-george-lucas-and-gary-kurtz-wer/
http://www.fromscripttodvd.com/star_wars_a_day_long_remembered.htm
http://cinematreasures.org/blog/2012/5/25/celebrating-the-original-star-wars-on-its-35th-anniversary
http://moviepostercollectors.com/MPC_Authentication_Star_Wars_Birthday_Cake.html
http://www.boxoffice.com/reviews/2008-08-special-effects?q=John+Lithgow
http://www.dvdactive.com/editorial/articles/star-wars-the-changes-part-one.html
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-12-14/restoring-star-wars/6994818
https://web.archive.org/web/20060902034847/http://starwars.com/collecting/shop/shopnews/news20060503.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20120316025904/http://www.hanshootsfirst.org/
http://www.hanshootsfirst.org/
http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/sped/ssws/pg1.htm
http://www.soundonsight.org/a-new-new-hope-film-preservation-and-the-problem-with-star-wars/
http://www.swonvideo.com/vhs/vvhstrilogyus1988box.htm
http://www.swonvideo.com/vhs/vtrilogylbxbox.htm
http://thestarwarstrilogy.com/starwars/post/2013/04/30/The-Original-Star-Wars-Trilogy-One-Last-Time
https://web.archive.org/web/20081026032957/http://www.starwars.com/movies/saga/20080826news.html
http://www.mindjack.com/film/archives/2006_05_01_archive.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110228024727/http://www.starwars.com/themovies/saga/preorder_bluray/index.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110507103835/http://www.starwars.com/movies/saga/bluraymay4/index.html
http://www.timesfreepress.com/news/2011/sep/16/star-wars-fans-react-with-mixed-feelings/
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=pq0tAAAAIBAJ&sjid=JYEFAAAAIBAJ&pg=840,174505
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=jZVjAAAAIBAJ&sjid=YnoNAAAAIBAJ&pg=1179,1672206
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=TpZjAAAAIBAJ&sjid=dnoNAAAAIBAJ&pg=5679,3145694
http://lubbockonline.com/news/021597/starwars.htm
http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-search/we/Archives?p_product=DM&p_text_direct-0=0ED3CD81CFEA1C2E&p_field_direct-0=document_id
http://www.filmsite.org/greatfilmssummary.html
http://www.filmsite.org/series-starwars4.html
http://www.sfgate.com/entertainment/article/Titanic-Makes-Movie-History-It-s-now-the-3011693.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20061217122529/http://www.newyorker.com/archive/content/articles/050523fr_archive02
http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1997-01-31/entertainment/9701310203_1_han-solo-tatooine-space
http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/STAR-WARS-returns-3138872.php
http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1999-10-15/entertainment/9910200025_1_movie-reviews-star-film/2
http://www.thenation.com/article/star-wars
https://web.archive.org/web/20060704161155/http://www.chicagoreader.com/movies/archives/0197/01317.html
http://www.chicagoreader.com/movies/archives/0197/01317.html
http://bostonphoenix.com/alt1/archive/movies/reviews/01-30-97/STAR_WARS_2.html
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1978
https://www.filmaffinity.com/en/awards.php?award_id=goldenglobes&year=1978
http://awards.bafta.org/award/1979/film
http://www.grammy.com/nominees/search?artist=&title=&year=1977&genre=All
http://www.thehugoawards.org/hugo-history/1978-hugo-awards/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140409003407/http://www.saturnawards.org/past.html
http://www.saturnawards.org/past.html
http://www.hollywood.com/news/movies/55027259/best-five-movie-trilogies
http://www.hitfix.com/galleries/10-of-the-best-movie-trilogies-of-all-time/11
https://web.archive.org/web/20090909065747/http://archives.cnn.com/2002/SHOWBIZ/Movies/05/07/ca.s02.george.lucas/
http://archives.cnn.com/2002/SHOWBIZ/Movies/05/07/ca.s02.george.lucas/
https://web.archive.org/web/20061112131535/http://starwars.com/community/event/celebration/f20050419/indexp17.html
http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,915986,00.html
http://www.tvparty.com/70starwars.html
http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-2768515.html
http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P1-222472315.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140223135520/http://www.maxim.com/comedians/interview-icon-mel-brooks
http://www.maxim.com/comedians/interview-icon-mel-brooks
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/life/television/news/2007-06-12-robot-chicken_N.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20110724223022/http://starwars.com/community/news/media/f20070724/index.html?page=3
https://web.archive.org/web/20070329033048/http://www.usps.com/communications/newsroom/2007/sr07_012.htm
http://www.usps.com/communications/newsroom/2007/sr07_012.htm
http://hub.contactmusic.com/news/christopher-nolans-star-wars-inspiration_1153625
http://www.decentfilms.com/articles/starwars
http://entertainment.time.com/2012/05/25/happy-35th-anniversary-star-wars/
http://www.afi.com/100years/movies.aspx
http://www.afi.com/100years/thrills.aspx
http://www.afi.com/100years/handv.aspx
http://www.afi.com/100years/movies10.aspx
http://www.afi.com/10top10/category.aspx?cat=7
http://www.afi.com/100Years/downloads.aspx
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/vault/Harris-Interactive-Poll-Research-Frankly-My-Dear-The-Force-is-With-Them-as-Gone-Wit-2008-02.pdf
http://www.filmsite.org/dailynews.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20060417082652/http://www.channel4.com/film/newsfeatures/microsites/G/greatest/results/control.jsp?resultspage=01
http://www.channel4.com/film/newsfeatures/microsites/G/greatest/results/control.jsp?resultspage=01
http://entertainment.time.com/2005/02/12/all-time-100-movies/slide/star-wars-1977/
http://explore.bfi.org.uk/sightandsoundpolls/2012/film/4ce2b6b738e6d
https://web.archive.org/web/20060901213527/http://www.wgaeast.org/greatest_screenplays/2006/04/03/list/index.html
http://www.wgaeast.org/greatest_screenplays/2006/04/03/list/index.html
http://herocomplex.latimes.com/movies/star-wars-flashback-christmas-77-left-fans-with-empty-feeling/
http://www.comicbookresources.com/?page=article&old=1&id=186
http://www.darkhorse.com/Comics/22-824/The-Star-Wars-1-Nick-Runge-cover
https://web.archive.org/web/20110912232305/http://www.starwars.com/hyperspace/member/kessel/news20051222.html
http://www.artofthetitle.com/title/star-wars/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160402074725/http://www.artofthetitle.com/title/star-wars/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160620103128/http://www.npr.org/2015/12/18/460269884/that-time-npr-turned-star-wars-into-a-radio-drama-and-it-actually-worked
https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/sep/15/star-wars-blu-ray-lucasfilm
https://www.theguardian.com/film/1977/dec/27/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/27/gareth-edwards-monsters-star-wars
http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/michael-leader-eastenders-star-wars_uk_57bd8454e4b042aee74e2904
http://mashable.com/2015/12/17/star-wars-original-cut/#q9dBHW8NZkq0
http://qctimes.com/news/opinion/editorial/columnists/doug-smith/yesterday-s-technology-can-be-a-collectible/article_9e12f11e-7a88-11e0-8008-001cc4c03286.html
http://lwlies.com/interviews/gareth-edwards-rogue-one-a-star-wars-story/
https://movies.yahoo.com/movie/contributor/1800050737/bio
https://select.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=FB0617FE345D17728DDDA10994DD405B8084F1D3
https://www.nytimes.com/library/film/052677wars.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/28/arts/television/28deca.html?_r=0
https://newrepublic.com/article/125424/innocences-star-wars-iv-a-new-hope-review-stanley-kauffmann
https://www.wired.com/2012/05/opinion-starwars/
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/08/the-star-wars-george-lucas-doesnt-want-you-to-see/379184/
http://www.jedinews.co.uk/misc/articles/gilbert-taylor-interview/
https://web.archive.org/web/20070527113855/http://www.history.com/minisite.do?content_type=Minisite_Generic&content_type_id=54079&display_order=3&mini_id=54078
https://web.archive.org/web/20131014063554/http://www.empireonline.com/500/92.asp
https://www.economist.com/blogs/dailychart/2011/07/film-franchises
https://www.photosecrets.com/evolution-of-the-star-wars-poster.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170728144712/https://www.photosecrets.com/evolution-of-the-star-wars-poster.html
https://filmschoolrejects.com/star-wars-the-posters-14ad09654325/
http://www.sci-fimovieposters.co.uk/british-star-wars-posters.htm
https://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/7330268/the_force_behind_star_wars
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/news/the-wizard-of-star-wars-20120504
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/04/06/AR2005040601186.html
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/features/star-wars--when-the-fans-hit-the-sith-2021858.html
http://splitsider.com/2011/02/the-lost-roles-of-bill-murray/
http://kotaku.com/5975671/how-star-wars-mightve-had-a-different-darth-vader
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/04/toshiro-mifune-star-wars-turned-down-obi-wan-kenobi-and-darth-vader-roles
https://web.archive.org/web/20170411140633/http://www.jedinews.co.uk/misc/articles/gilbert-taylor-interview/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140521032352/http://www.boxoffice.com/reviews/2008-08-special-effects?q=John+Lithgow
https://web.archive.org/web/20140521031520/http://www.hitfix.com/galleries/10-of-the-best-movie-trilogies-of-all-time/11
https://variety.com/1977/film/reviews/star-wars-3-1200424073/
https://www.loc.gov/rr/record/nrpb/registry/nrpb-2004reg.html
http://motherboard.vice.com/read/star-wars-despecialized-edition-removes-alterations-to-the-original-trilogy
https://web.archive.org/web/20151118153023/http://motherboard.vice.com/read/star-wars-despecialized-edition-removes-alterations-to-the-original-trilogy
http://theswca.com/index.php?action=disp_category&category_id=409
https://web.archive.org/web/20150311190755/http://thewaltdisneycompany.com/sites/default/files/reports/fy13-form-10k.pdf
http://thewaltdisneycompany.com/sites/default/files/reports/fy13-form-10k.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20180131235102/http://www.businessinsider.com/george-lucas-star-wars-bet-made-steven-spielberg-millions-2014-3
http://www.businessinsider.com/george-lucas-star-wars-bet-made-steven-spielberg-millions-2014-3?op=1
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/star-wars/10817059/10-films-that-influenced-Star-Wars.html
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/star-wars/10430039/Star-Wars-the-Telegraphs-original-1977-review.html
https://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/ford-star-wars-boosted-my-career-1687514
https://www.npr.org/2015/12/18/460269884/that-time-npr-turned-star-wars-into-a-radio-drama-and-it-actually-worked
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1576154/Lightsabre-wins-the-battle-of-movie-weapons.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20061107200516/http://bostonphoenix.com/alt1/archive/movies/reviews/01-30-97/STAR_WARS_2.html
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EYY6Nr7g0sA&t=4m
https://www.imdb.com/name/nm0004375/awards
https://web.archive.org/web/20150520115025/http://splitsider.com/2011/02/the-lost-roles-of-bill-murray
http://screenprism.com/insights/article/was-star-wars-episode-iv-a-new-hope-originally-released-under-another-title
https://www.inverse.com/article/43533-star-wars-a-new-hope-title-change-episode-iv-1981-1977
https://www.starwars.com/video/star-wars-episode-iv-a-new-hope-opening-crawl
https://web.archive.org/web/20180824154556/https://www.starwars.com/video/star-wars-episode-iv-a-new-hope-opening-crawl
http://time.com/4975813/star-wars-politics-watergate-george-lucas/
https://mashable.com/2014/09/27/star-wars-myths-gary-kurtz/#V5qk02DJeuqo
https://books.google.com/books?id=AKqMW5ChgScC
https://metro.co.uk/2013/04/17/star-wars-actor-richard-leparmentier-dies-aged-66-3619017/
https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130913052400/https://www.popmatters.com/feature/165507-abandoned-star-wars-plot-points-episode-ii-the-force-behind-the-scen/
https://www.starwars.com/news/the-cinema-behind-star-wars-the-dam-busters
https://web.archive.org/web/20140629085918/http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-2768515.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140629085914/http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P1-222472315.html
https://books.google.com/books?id=pAjYCgAAQBAJ&pg=PT344
https://books.google.com/books?id=uG0uCgAAQBAJ&pg=PT116
https://books.google.com/books?id=uG0uCgAAQBAJ&pg=PT122
https://www.npr.org/2013/06/20/193496493/translated-into-navajo-star-wars-will-be
https://web.archive.org/web/20131004160209/http://www.statepress.com/2013/10/03/alumna-four-others-dub-star-wars-film-into-navajo-language/
https://www.starwars.com/news/from-world-war-to-star-wars-dogfights
https://web.archive.org/web/20161001221045/http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/starwars/behind/pg1.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140517122522/http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/starwars/behind/pg2.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140517122204/http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/starwars/behind/pg3.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140517122203/http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/starwars/behind/pg4.htm
http://www.statepress.com/2013/10/03/alumna-four-others-dub-star-wars-film-into-navajo-language/
https://web.archive.org/web/20110507164638/http://www.thehugoawards.org/hugo-history/1978-hugo-awards/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180811231156/http://www.transmitmedia.com/svr/burtt/index.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140512223515/http://moviepostercollectors.com/MPC_Authentication_Star_Wars_Birthday_Cake.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130614055709/http://www.harrisinteractive.com/vault/Harris-Interactive-Poll-Research-Frankly-My-Dear-The-Force-is-With-Them-as-Gone-Wit-2008-02.pdf
https://archive.today/20160111082612/http://www.huffingtonpost.com/john-farr/bill-murray-and-the-roles_b_5850434.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140512213759/http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/11/08/carrie-fisher-star-wars-lose-weight-princess-leia_n_1081688.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140512220648/http://uproxx.com/gammasquad/2013/04/peter-cushing-a-life-in-film-is-a-genre-geeks-dream/
https://web.archive.org/web/20151208073659/http://kotaku.com/5975671/how-star-wars-mightve-had-a-different-darth-vader
https://web.archive.org/web/20151206013016/http://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/04/toshiro-mifune-star-wars-turned-down-obi-wan-kenobi-and-darth-vader-roles
https://web.archive.org/web/20140512215759/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6679425.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140501035521/http://metro.co.uk/2009/10/27/kenny-baker-240855/
https://web.archive.org/web/20181025150315/https://books.google.es/books?id=ZOlXDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA330
https://web.archive.org/web/20181025185918/https://metro.co.uk/2013/04/17/star-wars-actor-richard-leparmentier-dies-aged-66-3619017/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160830000808/http://www.cnet.com/news/stormtrooper-who-bonked-head-in-original-star-wars-movie-has-died/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160909042719/http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/michael-leader-eastenders-star-wars_uk_57bd8454e4b042aee74e2904
https://web.archive.org/web/20151227175748/http://time.com/4153583/star-wars-the-years-best-movie/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160310151813/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EYY6Nr7g0sA&t=4m
https://web.archive.org/web/20140628061429/http://books.google.com/books?id=AKqMW5ChgScC
https://web.archive.org/web/20180918054523/http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-2005-05-18-0505180309-story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180916011004/http://time.com/4975813/star-wars-politics-watergate-george-lucas/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140514094706/http://www.ign.com/articles/2002/11/11/an-interview-with-gary-kurtz?page=3
https://web.archive.org/web/20140513100038/http://www.ign.com/articles/2002/11/11/an-interview-with-gary-kurtz?page=1
https://web.archive.org/web/20141025103934/http://www.wired.com/2012/05/opinion-starwars/
https://web.archive.org/web/20141212195647/http://www.esquire.com/blogs/culture/star-wars-roger-christian
https://web.archive.org/web/20141219044407/http://www.denofgeek.com/movies/13707/the-den-of-geek-interview-roger-christian
https://web.archive.org/web/20130826032800/http://www.theasc.com/magazine/feb06/taylor/page3.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110611204422/http://www.americanheritage.com/entertainment/articles/web/20060525-star-wars-george-lucas-movies-hollywood-luke-skywalker-darth-vader-american-graffiti-science
https://web.archive.org/web/20130826032829/http://www.theasc.com/magazine/feb06/taylor/page4.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20190719001758/https://www.starwars.com/news/death-star-plans-are-in-the-main-computer-and-special-postcard
https://web.archive.org/web/20140517154439/http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/12/18/us-maya-calendar-starwars-idUSBRE8BH16120121218
https://web.archive.org/web/20131225213455/http://afi.com/100Years/scores.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20140510060624/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/star-wars/10817059/10-films-that-influenced-Star-Wars.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20141011002911/http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2010/03/23/star-wars-speed-and-other-movies-inspired-by-akira-kurosawa-on-his-100th-birthday/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150519071645/http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/news/the-wizard-of-star-wars-20120504
https://web.archive.org/web/20061008120525/http://www.dahoudek.com/pages/starwarsdune.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20190120093604/https://www.starwars.com/news/the-cinema-behind-star-wars-the-dam-busters
https://web.archive.org/web/20060722024302/http://www.musicweb-international.com/film/2005/Sum05/633sqdrn.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20190504174230/https://www.starwars.com/news/from-world-war-to-star-wars-dogfights
https://web.archive.org/web/20111128113848/http://www.currybet.net/cbet_blog/2009/02/how-accurate-was-kubricks-2001.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20170619164922/https://filmschoolrejects.com/star-wars-the-posters-14ad09654325/
https://web.archive.org/web/20170802160624/http://www.sci-fimovieposters.co.uk/british-star-wars-posters.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20130517065204/http://herocomplex.latimes.com/movies/star-wars-was-born-a-long-time-ago-but-not-all-that-far-far-away-in-1972-filmmakers-george-lucas-and-gary-kurtz-wer/
https://web.archive.org/web/20070505131324/http://www.fromscripttodvd.com/star_wars_a_day_long_remembered.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20151212054035/http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/star-wars-flashback-no-theater-846864
https://web.archive.org/web/20141219051904/http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=weekly&id=starwars4.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20141224033818/http://cinematreasures.org/blog/2012/5/25/celebrating-the-original-star-wars-on-its-35th-anniversary
https://web.archive.org/web/20150926230831/http://www.starwars.com/news/star-wars-in-ihe-uk-1977-the-first-star-wars-christmas
https://web.archive.org/web/20140517182918/http://www.the-numbers.com/movie/Star-Wars#tab=summary
https://web.archive.org/web/20181128053645/https://www.npr.org/2013/06/20/193496493/translated-into-navajo-star-wars-will-be
https://web.archive.org/web/20171203125712/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/star-wars-saga-set-3d-28485
https://web.archive.org/web/20181118100506/http://screenprism.com/insights/article/was-star-wars-episode-iv-a-new-hope-originally-released-under-another-title
https://web.archive.org/web/20180824183310/https://www.inverse.com/article/43533-star-wars-a-new-hope-title-change-episode-iv-1981-1977
https://web.archive.org/web/20181015153402/https://mashable.com/2014/09/27/star-wars-myths-gary-kurtz/#V5qk02DJeuqo
https://web.archive.org/web/20101223003329/http://www.dvdactive.com/editorial/articles/star-wars-the-changes-part-one.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170124070713/http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-12-14/restoring-star-wars/6994818
https://web.archive.org/web/20140828030602/http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/08/the-star-wars-george-lucas-doesnt-want-you-to-see/379184/
https://web.archive.org/web/20110925081226/http://collider.com/star-wars-blu-ray-changes-2/112594
https://web.archive.org/web/20120921225101/http://www.theasc.com/magazine/starwars/articles/sped/ssws/pg1.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20160305191832/https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140728002438/http://www.soundonsight.org/a-new-new-hope-film-preservation-and-the-problem-with-star-wars/
https://web.archive.org/web/20161013075503/http://mashable.com/2015/12/17/star-wars-original-cut/#q9dBHW8NZkq0
https://web.archive.org/web/20140818224123/http://theswca.com/index.php?action=disp_category&category_id=409
https://web.archive.org/web/20161127152152/http://qctimes.com/news/opinion/editorial/columnists/doug-smith/yesterday-s-technology-can-be-a-collectible/article_9e12f11e-7a88-11e0-8008-001cc4c03286.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140715002133/http://www.swonvideo.com/vhs/vvhstrilogyus1988box.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140714173627/http://www.swonvideo.com/vhs/vtrilogylbxbox.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140714151938/http://thestarwarstrilogy.com/starwars/post/2013/04/30/The-Original-Star-Wars-Trilogy-One-Last-Time
https://web.archive.org/web/20140430013032/http://www.ign.com/articles/2004/09/09/star-wars-trilogy
https://web.archive.org/web/20121018160342/http://www.ign.com/articles/2005/09/29/star-wars-due-again-on-dvd
https://web.archive.org/web/20060613224955/http://www.mindjack.com/film/archives/2006_05_01_archive.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140508151643/http://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/sep/15/star-wars-blu-ray-lucasfilm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140521032253/http://www.timesfreepress.com/news/2011/sep/16/star-wars-fans-react-with-mixed-feelings/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150410030917/http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/star-wars-movie-franchise-headed-786673
https://web.archive.org/web/20171227191916/http://lwlies.com/interviews/gareth-edwards-rogue-one-a-star-wars-story/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130520094753/http://select.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=FB0617FE345D17728DDDA10994DD405B8084F1D3
https://web.archive.org/web/20180307172557/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/weekends/pastrecords.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20120717101316/http://lubbockonline.com/news/021597/starwars.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20130517022355/http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-search/we/Archives?p_product=DM&p_text_direct-0=0ED3CD81CFEA1C2E&p_field_direct-0=document_id
https://web.archive.org/web/20131014123530/http://www.filmsite.org/greatfilmssummary.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20131003231735/http://www.filmsite.org/series-starwars4.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130618100509/http://www.sfgate.com/entertainment/article/Titanic-Makes-Movie-History-It-s-now-the-3011693.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20170303193154/https://www.economist.com/blogs/dailychart/2011/07/film-franchises
https://web.archive.org/web/20090504000735/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/adjusted.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20130430064749/http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/star-wars-1977
https://web.archive.org/web/20060424081519/http://www.nytimes.com/library/film/052677wars.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130801112049/http://variety.com/1977/film/reviews/star-wars-3-1200424073/
https://web.archive.org/web/20141222053030/http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/04/06/AR2005040601186.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151217215621/http://www.vulture.com/2015/12/nymag-original-star-wars-review-1977.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151222181328/https://newrepublic.com/article/125424/innocences-star-wars-iv-a-new-hope-review-stanley-kauffmann
https://web.archive.org/web/20141222053246/http://www.theguardian.com/film/1977/dec/27/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140608235200/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/star-wars/10430039/Star-Wars-the-Telegraphs-original-1977-review.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151201053228/http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/star_wars/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140512222841/http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1997-01-31/entertainment/9701310203_1_han-solo-tatooine-space
https://web.archive.org/web/20140508224839/http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/STAR-WARS-returns-3138872.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20141005073500/http://www.bbc.co.uk/films/2001/07/26/star_wars_1977_review.shtml
https://web.archive.org/web/20140708052727/http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1999-10-15/entertainment/9910200025_1_movie-reviews-star-film/2
https://web.archive.org/web/20141222041547/http://www.empireonline.com/reviews/reviewcomplete.asp?DVDID=117368
https://web.archive.org/web/20140225203949/http://www.thenation.com/article/star-wars
https://web.archive.org/web/20150402004056/http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1978
https://web.archive.org/web/20170414202022/http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0004375/awards
https://web.archive.org/web/20140513115345/https://www.filmaffinity.com/en/awards.php?award_id=goldenglobes&year=1978
https://web.archive.org/web/20140429183314/http://awards.bafta.org/award/1979/film
https://web.archive.org/web/20141222041310/http://www.grammy.com/nominees/search?artist=&title=&year=1977&genre=All
https://web.archive.org/web/20141222052758/http://www.empireonline.com/features/trilogy/default.asp?film=2
https://web.archive.org/web/20151223014531/http://www.popmatters.com/post/148823-the-10-greatest-motion-picture-trilogies-of-all-time/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140521031228/http://www.hollywood.com/news/movies/55027259/best-five-movie-trilogies
https://web.archive.org/web/20130923053945/http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,915986,00.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140611065916/http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/ford-star-wars-boosted-my-career-1687514
https://web.archive.org/web/20050524104154/http://www.tvparty.com/70starwars.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151230230058/http://www.vanityfair.com/magazine/2008/12/star_wars_special200812
https://web.archive.org/web/20070330175428/http://www.canonwars.com/SWCanon2.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170116171831/http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/rogue-one-teaser-1981-origins-881733
https://web.archive.org/web/20140328054859/http://www.filmsite.org/starw.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20160717103429/http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/28/arts/television/28deca.html?_r=0
https://web.archive.org/web/20140521031217/http://www.filmthreat.com/features/1546/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140329090328/http://www.metacritic.com/movie/spaceballs
https://web.archive.org/web/20140304054300/http://articles.latimes.com/2009/dec/27/entertainment/la-ca-conversation27-2009dec27
https://web.archive.org/web/20121119051422/http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/life/television/news/2007-06-12-robot-chicken_N.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140520220206/http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/features/star-wars--when-the-fans-hit-the-sith-2021858.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20141004190549/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1576154/Lightsabre-wins-the-battle-of-movie-weapons.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20160425022437/http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/news-bfi/announcements/best-sci-fi-characters-all-time-verdict
https://web.archive.org/web/20140924062739/http://www.chicagotribune.com/chi-0505080390may08-story.html#page=1
https://web.archive.org/web/20170929131547/http://www.starwars.com/may-the-4th
https://web.archive.org/web/20130413113345/http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-star-wars-episode-iv-a-new-hope-1977
https://web.archive.org/web/20140505015532/http://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/27/gareth-edwards-monsters-star-wars
https://web.archive.org/web/20140508200853/http://www.thewrap.com/john-lasseter-disney-fired-frozen-healed-studio-oscarwrap-down-wire
https://web.archive.org/web/20141219064444/http://hub.contactmusic.com/news/christopher-nolans-star-wars-inspiration_1153625
https://web.archive.org/web/20120206024753/http://www.decentfilms.com/articles/starwars
https://web.archive.org/web/20140601173454/http://entertainment.time.com/2012/05/25/happy-35th-anniversary-star-wars/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150529012109/http://www.afi.com/100Years/movies.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20131225212216/http://afi.com/100Years/thrills.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20160304082823/http://afi.com/100years/handv.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20160320160930/http://afi.com/100Years/cheers.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20150818175815/http://www.afi.com/100Years/movies10.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20140328081240/http://www.afi.com/10top10/category.aspx?cat=7
https://web.archive.org/web/20140426215135/http://www.afi.com/100years/downloads.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20110809082926/http://www.filmsite.org/dailynews.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20141221100526/http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/list/100-greatest-films-all-time-713215
https://web.archive.org/web/20141025110254/http://entertainment.time.com/2005/02/12/all-time-100-movies/slide/star-wars-1977/
https://web.archive.org/web/20141122053716/http://explore.bfi.org.uk/sightandsoundpolls/2012/film/4ce2b6b738e6d
https://web.archive.org/web/20150323150021/http://www.loc.gov/rr/record/nrpb/registry/nrpb-2004reg.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140526123434/http://herocomplex.latimes.com/movies/star-wars-flashback-christmas-77-left-fans-with-empty-feeling/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140526060804/http://www.cbsnews.com/news/star-wars-action-figures-dominoes-enter-toy-hall-of-fame/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180930231749/https://www.syfy.com/syfywire/the-first-star-wars-sequel-inside-the-writing-of-splinter-of-the-minds-eye
https://web.archive.org/web/20120813074853/http://www.comicbookresources.com/?page=article&old=1&id=186
https://web.archive.org/web/20140526060000/http://www.darkhorse.com/Comics/22-824/The-Star-Wars-1-Nick-Runge-cover
https://comicbook.com/starwars/2019/08/09/star-wars-saga-bluray-rereleases-artwork-covers/#10
https://io9.gizmodo.com/the-mandalorian-will-be-available-on-disney-from-day-o-1833985687/amp
https://huffingtonpost.com/john-farr/bill-murray-and-the-roles_b_5850434.html
https://huffingtonpost.com/2011/11/08/carrie-fisher-star-wars-lose-weight-princess-leia_n_1081688.html
https://cnet.com/news/stormtrooper-who-bonked-head-in-original-star-wars-movie-has-died/
https://popmatters.com/feature/165507-abandoned-star-wars-plot-points-episode-ii-the-force-behind-the-scen/
https://ign.com/articles/2002/11/11/an-interview-with-gary-kurtz?page=3
https://ign.com/articles/2002/11/11/an-interview-with-gary-kurtz?page=1
https://denofgeek.com/movies/13707/the-den-of-geek-interview-roger-christian
https://the-numbers.com/movie/Star-Wars#tab=summary
https://hollywoodreporter.com/news/star-wars-flashback-no-theater-846864
https://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=weekly&id=starwars4.htm
https://hollywoodreporter.com/news/star-wars-saga-set-3d-28485
https://collider.com/star-wars-blu-ray-changes-2/112594/
https://ign.com/articles/2004/09/09/star-wars-trilogy
https://ign.com/articles/2005/09/29/star-wars-due-again-on-dvd
https://hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/star-wars-movie-franchise-headed-786673
https://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/weekends/pastrecords.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/adjusted.htm
https://rogerebert.com/reviews/star-wars-1977
https://popmatters.com/post/148823-the-10-greatest-motion-picture-trilogies-of-all-time/
https://hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/rogue-one-teaser-1981-origins-881733
https://filmthreat.com/features/1546/
https://metacritic.com/movie/spaceballs
https://articles.latimes.com/2009/dec/27/entertainment/la-ca-conversation27-2009dec27
https://rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-star-wars-episode-iv-a-new-hope-1977
https://thewrap.com/john-lasseter-disney-fired-frozen-healed-studio-oscarwrap-down-wire
https://hollywoodreporter.com/list/100-greatest-films-all-time-713215
https://syfy.com/syfywire/the-first-star-wars-sequel-inside-the-writing-of-splinter-of-the-minds-eye
https://www.bbc.co.uk/films/2001/07/26/star_wars_1977_review.shtml
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1997/01/06/why-is-the-force-still-with-us
https://time.com/4144367/star-wars-the-force-awakens-crawl/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140215040725/http://lucasfilm.com/star-wars-episode-4-a-new-hope
http://lucasfilm.com/star-wars-episode-4-a-new-hope
http://www.jeditemplearchives.com/specialreports/banthatracks/archives/banthatracks08.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20130623142537/http://www.jeditemplearchives.com/specialreports/banthatracks/archives/banthatracks08.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20060822121004/http://www.starwars.com/bio/ralphmcquarrie.html
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_5Iv_sazoGg&t=5m49s
https://www.newyorker.com/archive/content/articles/050523fr_archive02
https://www.vulture.com/2015/12/nymag-original-star-wars-review-1977.html
https://www.empireonline.com/reviews/reviewcomplete.asp?DVDID=117368
https://www.empireonline.com/features/trilogy/default.asp?film=2
https://www.vanityfair.com/magazine/2008/12/star_wars_special200812
https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-2005-05-18-0505180309-story.html
https://www.chicagotribune.com/chi-0505080390may08-story.html#page=1
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/star-wars-action-figures-dominoes-enter-toy-hall-of-fame/
https://web.archive.org/web/20191209125045/https://time.com/4144367/star-wars-the-force-awakens-crawl/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190725155722/https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1997/01/06/why-is-the-force-still-with-us
https://web.archive.org/web/20190926042851/https://comicbook.com/starwars/2019/08/09/star-wars-saga-bluray-rereleases-artwork-covers/#10
https://web.archive.org/web/20190412063838/https://io9.gizmodo.com/the-mandalorian-will-be-available-on-disney-from-day-o-1833985687/amp
https://books.google.com/books?id=ZOlXDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA330
https://www.empireonline.com/movies/features/500-greatest-movies/
https://books.google.com/books?id=Scr6AQAAQBAJ&pg=PT109
https://books.google.com/books?id=uW3pNt5wKtYC&q=star%20wars%20audio%20CD&pg=PA239
https://www.cbr.com/star-wars-john-wayne-garindan/
https://www.metv.com/stories/john-wayne-secretly-appeared-in-wagon-train-star-wars
https://mashable.com/2014/09/27/star-wars-myths-gary-kurtz/
https://voyagecomics.com/2019/11/16/obi-wan-kenobi-was-originally-created-to-be-a-star-wars-version-of-gandalf/
http://fd.noneinc.com/secrethistoryofstarwarscom/secrethistoryofstarwars.com/visualdevelopmentofdarthvader.html
http://fd.noneinc.com/secrethistoryofstarwarscom/secrethistoryofstarwars.com/jabba.html
https://www.newyorker.com/culture/persons-of-interest/the-force-is-still-strong-with-john-williams
http://fd.noneinc.com/secrethistoryofstarwarscom/secrethistoryofstarwars.com/loststarwarsstories.html
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fdFHg694CBA
https://collider.com/george-lucas-letter-lost-damon-lindelof-carlton-cuse/
https://variety.com/1998/film/news/toto-recall-1117488198/#!
https://web.archive.org/web/20210130073633/https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/Star-Wars-Ep-IV-A-New-Hope
https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/Star-Wars-Ep-IV-A-New-Hope
https://web.archive.org/web/20210131212332/https://www.cbr.com/star-wars-john-wayne-garindan/
https://web.archive.org/web/20201022201213/https://metv.com/stories/john-wayne-secretly-appeared-in-wagon-train-star-wars
https://web.archive.org/web/20181015153402/https://mashable.com/2014/09/27/star-wars-myths-gary-kurtz/
https://web.archive.org/web/20201111175900/http://fd.noneinc.com/secrethistoryofstarwarscom/secrethistoryofstarwars.com/loststarwarsstories.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20200629022037/https://voyagecomics.com/2019/11/16/obi-wan-kenobi-was-originally-created-to-be-a-star-wars-version-of-gandalf/
https://web.archive.org/web/20201216180323/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fdFHg694CBA
https://web.archive.org/web/20201120125137/https://collider.com/george-lucas-letter-lost-damon-lindelof-carlton-cuse/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200819212941/https://books.google.com/books?id=Scr6AQAAQBAJ&pg=PT109
https://web.archive.org/web/20201112034852/http://fd.noneinc.com/secrethistoryofstarwarscom/secrethistoryofstarwars.com/visualdevelopmentofdarthvader.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20201111185345/http://fd.noneinc.com/secrethistoryofstarwarscom/secrethistoryofstarwars.com/jabba.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20201101005324/https://www.newyorker.com/culture/persons-of-interest/the-force-is-still-strong-with-john-williams
https://web.archive.org/web/20210131212344/https://books.google.com/books?id=pAjYCgAAQBAJ&pg=PT344
https://web.archive.org/web/20210123151554/https://variety.com/1998/film/news/toto-recall-1117488198/#!
https://www.starwars.com/bio/anthonydaniels.html
https://www.starwars.com/community/event/celebration/f20050419/indexp17.html
https://www.starwars.com/bio/ralphmcquarrie.html
https://www.starwars.com/bio/industriallightmagic.html
https://www.starwars.com/news/death-star-plans-are-in-the-main-computer-and-special-postcard
https://www.starwars.com/episode-iv/bts/article/f20070601/index.html?page=1
https://www.starwars.com/news/star-wars-in-ihe-uk-1977-the-first-star-wars-christmas
https://www.starwars.com/collecting/shop/shopnews/news20060503.html
https://www.starwars.com/movies/saga/20080826news.html
https://www.starwars.com/themovies/saga/preorder_bluray/index.html
https://www.starwars.com/movies/saga/bluraymay4/index.html
https://www.starwars.com/community/news/media/f20070724/index.html?page=3
https://www.starwars.com/may-the-4th
https://www.starwars.com/hyperspace/member/kessel/news20051222.html
https://www.newstatesman.com/culture/film/2017/05/starting-star-wars-how-george-lucas-came-create-galaxy
https://io9.gizmodo.com/lets-dive-into-star-wars-the-skywalker-sagas-27-disc-b-1842496774
https://web.archive.org/web/20210313074612/https://io9.gizmodo.com/lets-dive-into-star-wars-the-skywalker-sagas-27-disc-b-1842496774
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6gtQck24Nf8&t=259s
https://www.starwars.com/news/the-cinema-behind-star-wars-metropolis
https://web.archive.org/web/20170623142038/http://www.starwars.com/news/the-cinema-behind-star-wars-metropolis
https://web.archive.org/web/20201124061718/https://www.newstatesman.com/culture/film/2017/05/starting-star-wars-how-george-lucas-came-create-galaxy
https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2014/04/william-friedkin-sorcerer-star-wars
https://web.archive.org/web/20150412210841/http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2014/04/william-friedkin-sorcerer-star-wars
https://britishcinematographer.co.uk/brian-johnson/
http://theswca.com/index.php?action=disp_item&item_id=22504
http://theswca.com/index.php?action=disp_category&category_id=407
https://www.starwars.com/news/actors-who-almost-appeared-in-star-wars
https://www.bigissue.com/interviews/we-meet-anthony-daniels-the-man-behind-c-3po/
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/features/star-wars-revenge-sith-anniversary-prequels-defence-anakin-padme-a9519701.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20210605145321/https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/features/star-wars-revenge-sith-anniversary-prequels-defence-anakin-padme-a9519701.html
https://screenrant.com/star-wars-sequel-prequel-trilogies-comparison-better/
https://web.archive.org/web/20201217033234/https://screenrant.com/star-wars-sequel-prequel-trilogies-comparison-better/
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2021/apr/28/star-wars-prequels-not-very-much-liked-says-ewan-mcgregor
https://web.archive.org/web/20210605145336/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2021/apr/28/star-wars-prequels-not-very-much-liked-says-ewan-mcgregor
https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b809116f3
https://web.archive.org/web/20210405231604/https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b809116f3
https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b8318ab4d
https://web.archive.org/web/20210405231648/https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b8318ab4d
https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b88f414fd
https://web.archive.org/web/20210405231831/https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b88f414fd
https://www.cnet.com/news/why-new-star-wars-trilogy-is-worse-than-the-prequels/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210605145521/https://www.cnet.com/news/why-new-star-wars-trilogy-is-worse-than-the-prequels/
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2020/nov/12/george-lucas-star-wars-sequel-trilogy-disney
https://web.archive.org/web/20201117211259/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2020/nov/12/george-lucas-star-wars-sequel-trilogy-disney
http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-03-07/how-disney-bought-lucasfilm-and-its-plans-for-star-wars
https://web.archive.org/web/20170930150541/https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-03-07/how-disney-bought-lucasfilm-and-its-plans-for-star-wars
https://hollywoodreporter.com/news/star-wars-force-awakens-worldwide-846428
https://web.archive.org/web/20151209224531/http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/star-wars-force-awakens-worldwide-846428
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/star-wars-episode-8-title-929351
https://web.archive.org/web/20210331104747/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/star-wars-episode-8-title-929351
https://ew.com/movies/2019/04/12/star-wars-episode-ix-title/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210331100218/https://ew.com/movies/2019/04/12/star-wars-episode-ix-title/
https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/568f1ba214607
https://web.archive.org/web/20201021190327/https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/568f1ba214607
https://variety.com/2018/film/features/solo-a-star-wars-story-directors-reshoots-ron-howard-1202817841/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210605145624/https://variety.com/2018/film/features/solo-a-star-wars-story-directors-reshoots-ron-howard-1202817841/
https://time.com/4594017/rogue-one-star-wars-timeline/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210605145617/https://time.com/4594017/rogue-one-star-wars-timeline/
https://www.denofgeek.com/movies/star-wars-return-of-the-jedi-story-spoilers-recap-legacy/
https://www.nytimes.com/1981/01/18/movies/why-hollywood-breeds-self-indulgence.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20150524084132/https://www.nytimes.com/1981/01/18/movies/why-hollywood-breeds-self-indulgence.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20210605204914/https://www.denofgeek.com/movies/star-wars-return-of-the-jedi-story-spoilers-recap-legacy/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/review97/empirestrikesbackmartin.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20150716072250/http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/review97/empirestrikesbackmartin.htm
https://edition.cnn.com/2020/05/21/entertainment/the-empire-strikes-back-turns-40/index.html
https://inktank.fi/20-things-you-didnt-know-about-carrie-fisher-and-star-wars/amp/
https://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/list-facts-actress-writer-carrie-fisher-article-1.2405759?outputType=amp
https://www.goodhousekeeping.com/uk/lifestyle/amp558228/carrie-fisher/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200527040123/https://edition.cnn.com/2020/05/21/entertainment/the-empire-strikes-back-turns-40/index.html
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-maya-calendar-starwars-idUSBRE8BH16120121218
https://www.upworthy.com/in-1978-carl-sagan-boldly-called-out-star-wars-for-being-too-white-to-a-quiet-audience
https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2019/05/03/why-didnt-chewbacca-get-medal-star-wars-actors-death-reignites-heated-debate/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/why-cinemascore-matters-box-office-225563/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210719145918/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/why-cinemascore-matters-box-office-225563/
http://www.timewarptv.com/Default.aspx?tabid=141
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/star-wars-al-pacino-turned-down-part-of-han-solo-because-the-script-was-too-confusing-9723652.html
https://www.starburstmagazine.com/movie-news-james-caan
https://io9.gizmodo.com/star-wars-audition-tapes-feature-a-very-different-origi-1702308808
https://books.google.com/books?id=egwlCgAAQBAJ&pg=PA298
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q17738#identifiers
https://archive.org/details/mythmakerlifewor00baxt
https://books.google.com/books?id=wWodBQAAQBAJ
https://archive.org/details/blessingsindisgu00guinrich
https://books.google.com/books?id=YkzKPAAACAAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=uG0uCgAAQBAJ
https://archive.org/details/starwarsfromconc0000sans
https://books.google.com/books?id=cLbvA_WyBRMC
https://www.starwars.com/films/star-wars-episode-iv-a-new-hope
https://www.lucasfilm.com/productions/episode-iv/
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v46636
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/55187
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076759/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/star_wars/reviews
https://starwars.fandom.com/wiki/Star_Wars:_Episode_IV_A_New_Hope
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4334797-6
https://viaf.org/viaf/185100833
https://authority.bibsys.no/authority/rest/authorities/html/99061146
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX5637985
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14438637z
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14438637z
https://id.ndl.go.jp/auth/ndlna/001113398
https://www.idref.fr/203924460
https://www.gamesradar.com/uk/star-wars-timeline/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210425000131/https://www.gamesradar.com/uk/star-wars-timeline/
https://www.cinemablend.com/news/2484984/greedo-actor-is-confused-by-maclunkey-and-star-wars-in-general
https://www.yahoo.com/lifestyle/enough-hope-references-recreate-apparently-200425482.html
http://www.theforce.net/jedicouncil/interview/lee2003.asp
https://ghostarchive.org/varchive/youtube/20211211/_5Iv_sazoGg
https://ghostarchive.org/varchive/youtube/20211211/6gtQck24Nf8
https://observer.com/2020/07/disney-isnt-ignoring-erasing-star-wars-lucasfilm-box-office/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210605145632/https://observer.com/2020/07/disney-isnt-ignoring-erasing-star-wars-lucasfilm-box-office/
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007586465905171
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058516989306706
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q17738#P444
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0076759/
https://www.newspapers.com/clip/39389179/may-27-1977-siskel-star-wars-review/
https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220524/https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/star-wars-al-pacino-turned-down-part-of-han-solo-because-the-script-was-too-confusing-9723652.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080207165620/http://www.producersguild.org/pg/awards_a/halloffame.asp
http://producersguild.org/pg/awards_a/halloffame.asp
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/22123/enwp
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSKJW1wazQ8
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/long_reads/koo-stark-star-wars-camie-loneozner-new-hope-female-hero-george-lucas-carrie-fisher-a8131726.html
https://www.townandcountrymag.com/society/tradition/a34272463/koo-stark-prince-andrew-american-actress-girlfriend/
http://cinematreasures.org/theaters/5426
https://www.sfgate.com/entertainment/article/Northpoint-Theater-To-Close-on-July-31-2818424.php
https://www.audacy.com/kcbsradio/news/local/sf-loved-star-wars-weeks-before-anyone-else-45-years-ago
https://www.starwarsatthemovies.com/blog/2020/5/21/empire-at-the-northpoint
https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/12/kurt-russell-star-wars
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/1003722820
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/1037353117
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/908031206
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/657407687
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/13842348
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/8896917
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0190-8286
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/1077-6788
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/30856250
http://www.afi.com/100years/quotes.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20150415022946/http://www.afi.com/100Years/quotes.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20190925042239/https://books.google.com/books?id=wWodBQAAQBAJ
https://www.cultureslate.com/news/the-real-life-war-star-wars-almost-caused
https://archive.org/details/george-lucas-a-life-brian-jay-jones/
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/n78001095
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/star_wars_episode_iv_a_new_hope
https://www.lucasfilm.com/news/lucasfilm-originals-the-dykstraflex/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160127084310/http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/star-wars-film
https://bbfc.co.uk/releases/star-wars-film
https://web.archive.org/web/20170709094937/http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b6b738e6d
http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b6b738e6d
http://io9.gizmodo.com/5875998/behold-the-1977-budget-breakdown-for-star-wars
https://web.archive.org/web/20160306124631/http://io9.gizmodo.com/5875998/behold-the-1977-budget-breakdown-for-star-wars
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/star-wars-episode-iv---a-new-hope
https://web.archive.org/web/20210130044401/https://www.metacritic.com/movie/star-wars-episode-iv---a-new-hope
https://www.gamesradar.com/amp/mark-hamill-reflects-on-his-competition-for-playing-luke-any-one-of-those-guys-was-perfect/
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/30/movies/star-wars-the-last-jedi-luke-skywalker-mark-hamill.amp.html
https://books.google.com/books?id=aD1EBgAAQBAJ&q=500+million&pg=PA173
https://penguinrandomhousehighereducation.com/book/?isbn=9780345543363
https://www.loc.gov/static/programs/national-film-preservation-board/documents/star_wars.pdf
https://www.bfi.org.uk/news/best-sci-fi-characters-all-time-verdict
https://www.denofgeek.com/movies/the-den-of-geek-interview-john-dykstra/
https://www.ign.com/articles/2011/09/13/chatting-with-chewie
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/films/0/wookie-won-peter-mayhew-brought-chewbacca-life/
https://www.wired.com/2013/05/star-wars-first-draft-comic/
https://www.artofthetitle.com/title/star-wars/
https://www.news.com.au/finance/business/media/the-secret-weapon-behind-star-wars/news-story/75eb078a8b14d93fce23b06e98805ffb
https://screenrant.com/star-wars-kelsey-grammer-audition/
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/08/the-remarkable-way-chewbacca-got-a-voice/375697/
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/hardtalk/9656152.stm
https://ew.com/article/2000/08/09/sir-alec-guinness-hated-being-remembered-star-wars-jedi-knight/
https://www.indiewire.com/features/general/rogue-one-gareth-edwards-4k-restoration-a-new-hope-star-wars-1201762331/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q17738#P345
