The Invaders
The Invaders is an American science-fiction television series created by Larry Cohen that aired on ABC for two seasons, from 1967 to 1968. Roy Thinnes stars as David Vincent,  who after stumbling across evidence of an in-progress invasion of aliens from outer space—the aliens disguising themselves as humans and gradually infiltrating human institutions—tries to thwart the invasion despite the disbelief of officials and the general public, and the undermining of his efforts by the aliens. The series was a Quinn Martin production.


== Plot ==
Roy Thinnes stars as architect David Vincent, who accidentally learns of a secret alien invasion already underway and thereafter travels from place to place attempting to foil the aliens' plots and warn a skeptical populace of the danger. A plot format of a man on the run are shared with The Fugitive and Coronet Blue, two former Quinn Martin productions, while that of a lone man attempting to warn the public about alien infiltration is found in '50s movies like Invasion of the Body Snatchers and I Married a Monster from Outer Space. Other plot elements include Vincent's grim and lonely determination to find "tangible proof of the invaders’ existence" despite having become a "quasi-famous object of public ridicule";  the aliens' success in hiding their plots, undermining Vincent's credibility and killing off those who also discover them in ways disguised as a natural death; and the constant tension over whether the individuals Vincent comes across are humans or aliens. As the series progresses, Vincent is able to convince a small number of people to help him fight the aliens.
In many episodes, at least one individual, often a key figure such as a U.S. Air Force intelligence officer (in the episode "The Innocent"), a police officer (in "Genesis" and "The Spores"), a U.S. Army major ("Doomsday Minus One"), or a NASA official ("Moonshot") become aware of the alien threat and survive the episode in which he or she was introduced. In "The Leeches", a millionaire (Arthur Hill) survives an alien abduction after being rescued by Vincent, while in "Quantity: Unknown" a scientist (Susan Strasberg) is convinced of alien technology. In "The Saucer", guest stars Anne Francis and Charles Drake witness an alien saucer's landing. In the second season, larger groups of surviving witnesses were featured, as in episodes "Dark Outpost" and "The Pursued", and three scientists in "Labyrinth". Most significant of these is millionaire industrialist Edgar Scoville (Kent Smith), who became a semi-regular character as of December 1967, heading a small but influential group from the episode "The Believers". Later episodes had the military involved ("The Peacemaker"), as Vincent's claims were now clearly being taken more seriously. In "The Miracle" (guest star Barbara Hershey), after an alien encounter, Vincent manages to retain a piece of alien technology both as evidence and for examination by both his group and the authorities.
The series depicted an undercurrent of at least partial credulity among authority figures regarding Vincent's claims, even in the first season, as in early episodes such as "The Mutation", where a security agent (Lin McCarthy) is keeping an eye on Vincent and ends up inclined to believe him. In "The Innocent", the USAF officer (Dabney Coleman) guns down an alien who incinerates in front of him, tying in with Vincent's claims; while at the end of the episode after apparently disbelieving Vincent, he then phones USAF security to run a full background check on an officer whom Vincent claimed was an alien. In "Moonshot", the NASA official (Peter Graves) is fully expecting Vincent to arrive; and in "Condition: Red", a NORAD officer and staff witness an alien UFO formation onscreen, and are left convinced. Each of these incidents is kept to just the individual episode, with hinted official backing of Vincent (or at least 'semi-backing' suggested in the episode "The Condemned"). Elsewhere, Vincent is shown as being publicly 'dismissed as a crank' by the authorities, while behind the scenes they apparently take him seriously—for example in "Doomsday Minus One", where Vincent has been invited by an Army intelligence official and then is given classified information; in the two-part "Summit Meeting" where he is present at a top security meeting without any question; and in "Condition: Red" where he is allowed into NORAD without question. Thus, viewers were left to draw their own conclusions as to the situation regarding Vincent's actual standing.
Some controversy arose regarding the sudden ending of the television series after season two, as it was deemed no proper ending had been written (unlike The Fugitive, another Quinn Martin show). Yet the final season-two episode "Inquisition" does stand as some kind of series conclusion where Vincent finally convinces a key figure, an initially skeptical special assistant to the Attorney General (Mark Richman), that the Invaders have arrived, after first defeating an alien plan to use a special weapon. The aliens had withdrawn all their key personnel from Earth prior to its use, and the closing narration is that Vincent, Edgar Scoville, and the now-convinced Special Assistant will join forces as the vanguard to watch for any return of the Invaders. Thus, this episode can be seen as showing Vincent achieve his goal of 'convincing disbelieving authorities' at least, and the Invaders' plans temporarily thwarted, leaving the door open for any possible later sequel or spinoff series.


=== Characteristics of the invaders ===
The emphasis of the series is on Vincent and his efforts, and unlike most science fiction the back story of the aliens—their "dying" planet in "another galaxy" (or even their names)—is "a deliberate blank". They appear human except for a few telltale characteristics (they lack a pulse, the ability to bleed, or show emotion, and many have a deformed fourth finger). While the disguised aliens can be killed by humans, they glow red and disintegrate when this happens, eliminating evidence of their existence. The aliens are shown in their true form in only two episodes. In "Genesis" (season one, episode five), an ill alien researcher loses his human form and is briefly seen immersed in a tank of water.  "The Enemy" has a dying, mutated Invader (Richard Anderson) revert to his true appearance. Unless they receive periodic treatments in what Vincent calls "regeneration chambers", which consume a great deal of electrical power, they revert to their alien form. One scene in the series showed an alien beginning to revert, filmed in soft focus and with pulsating red light.
Most of the aliens, in particular the lowest-ranking members or workers in green jumpsuits, are emotionless and have deformed little fingers that cannot move and are bent at an unnatural angle, although  "deluxe models" could manipulate this finger. Black aliens' palms were not pale, like humans of African descent, but were the same shade as the rest of their skins. Some mutants experience emotions similar to those of humans and even oppose the alien takeover.
When aliens die, their bodies  glow red and burn up along with their clothes and anything else they were touching, preventing the documenting of their existence. On several occasions, a dying alien would deliberately touch a piece of their technology to prevent it from falling into the hands of humans.  In episode three ("The Mutation"), a female alien who falls for Vincent and is killed while running to warn him he is in danger tells him, "That's what happens to us when we die here on Earth."


=== Technology of the invaders ===
The type of spaceship by which the Invaders reach the Earth is a flying saucer of a design resembling early 1950s photographs of alleged UFOs produced by self-proclaimed UFO "contactee" George Adamski. They differ slightly from Adamski's images in not having three spheres on the underside, but instead five shallower protrusions. Numerous pieces of alien technology featured "penta" or five-sided designs. It was a principle of the production crew to show The Invaders' technology with set, prop designs, and control panels that were utterly alien from the conventional human ones (such as H. R. Giger would later present in Alien).
To kill humans they apply a small, handheld, disc-shaped weapon with five glowing white lights to the back of the victim's head or neck to induce a seemingly natural death, which is usually diagnosed as a cerebral hemorrhage. They also employ weapons that disintegrate witnesses, vehicles, and when necessary members of their own race with some sort of ray. Also in their arsenal is a small device consisting of two spinning, transparent crystals joined at their corners which acts like a truth serum, forces human beings to do the aliens' bidding, or (in most cases) imposes the complete loss of memory of previous events.


== Themes ==
According to producer Alan A. Armer, "The major thing that the show had going for it is the fact that we are all a little bit paranoid, and that it’s easy to identify with ... one person fighting the society, fighting the government, fighting an invisible force ...”  Creator of the series Larry Cohen describes Hitchcock as a major influence.

Of course The Invaders was definitely in the same genre as The Fugitive: a man moving across America, in search of something, and in jeopardy.  Really, to me, my idea was taken more from Alfred Hitchcock than it was taken from The Fugitive.  I always liked the Hitchcock movie where the hero is in a situation where he's the only one that knows the spies are operating, and no one will believe him.  And when he takes the police back to the locale where he saw their operation, everything has been removed, there's no more evidence, everybody lies and says that he was never there before.
Such Hitchcock movies include The 39 Steps (1935) with Robert Donat, Saboteur (1942) with Robert Cummings, and of course North by Northwest (1959) with Cary Grant.The large numbers of UFO reports in the post-World War II era was the subject of paranoia and conspiracy, as scientists and authorities (the Condon Committee and the Robertson Panel), and debunkers (Committee for Skeptical Inquiry), dismissed or downplayed the reports; and dedicated "ufologists" made sometimes-outlandish claims of alien presence on Earth and of earthly conspiracies to suppress evidence of it. Interest in the subject of UFOs became fringe, and "a punchline" in popular culture.


=== Cold War allegory ===
For many viewers, the theme of paranoia infusing The Invaders often appeared to reflect Cold War realities of communist infiltration that had lingered from the McCarthy period a decade earlier. Series creator Larry Cohen has acknowledged that this was intended, along with a political theme for the series. In audio commentary for the episode "The Innocent", included in the first-season DVD collection, Cohen said his knowledge of the blacklisting of Hollywood screenwriters for their communist connections inspired him to make "a documentary" of the fear of the infiltration of society, by substituting space aliens for communists.Cohen also acknowledged he was not the first to turn Cold War fears into science-fiction drama; such fears had influenced such films as Invasion of the Body Snatchers and especially I Married a Monster from Outer Space. Cohen also stated in his commentary that the political intent inherent in some of his creations, including The Invaders, was not always appreciated or shared by left-wing producers and actors.
In an interview shown in the special-features segment included on the DVD release of Invasion of the Body Snatchers, star Kevin McCarthy strongly denied any desire by director Don Siegel or the film's writer to connect the invaders to communists.


== Cast ==
Roy Thinnes appears as David Vincent in all 43 episodes.  For the first 30 episodes, he is the only recurring character.
Kent Smith appears as Edgar Scoville for 13 episodes, beginning with episode 31, "The Believers".  Scoville heads a small group called The Believers, who accept David Vincent's claims of alien invasion.  None of the other Believers are series regulars, and are typically only seen briefly on-screen as extras or in bit roles.
Lin McCarthy appears as Col. Archie Harmon, a skeptical friend of Scoville's, in two episodes.
Alfred Ryder appears as an Invaders leader in three episodes. He is almost certainly not playing the same character in all three episodes, but may be playing the same character in his final two appearances.
Max Kleven appears as an unnamed Alien in five episodes, but he is almost certainly not meant to be the same alien in each appearance.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
The series was produced by Quinn Martin, who was looking for a show to replace the immensely popular The Fugitive, which was ending its run in 1967. Larry Cohen, the series' creator, had conceived two earlier series with similarities to The Invaders. Chuck Connors starred in Branded (1965) as a soldier court-martialed for cowardice, who traveled the West searching for witnesses and proof that he had acted valiantly, and Coronet Blue (1967) about Michael Alden, a man suffering from amnesia who was being pursued by a powerful group of people. All he could remember were the words "Coronet Blue".
Another inspiration was the wave of "alien Doppelgänger" films which had come 10 years before in the 1950s, typified by Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1956) and the British film Quatermass 2 (1957), known in America as Enemy from Space.  While these paranoid tales of extraterrestrials who lived among us, posing as humans while planning a takeover, are usually linked with a Red Scare subtext, Martin simply wanted a premise that would keep the hero moving around and that would explain why he could not go to the authorities (i.e. not only had some aliens infiltrated human institutions already, but most humans would dismiss a claim of alien invasion as a paranoid delusion). However, as the series unfolded, the various 'disappearances' of people in episodes (killed by the Invaders, such as Vincent's partner Alan Landers—played by James Daly—in the pilot, etc.), those installed alien figures revealed to be aliens by Vincent thus having to withdraw (such as Edward Andrews' character in "The Mutation", etc.) plus the surviving one or two key human witnesses in most episodes (from the third episode onwards) did rather alter the basic premise of the show to something deeper and more thought-provoking early on.
Season one was produced in association with the ABC Television Network or as it was listed in the end credits, "The American Broadcasting Company Television Networks".


=== Production Sequence ===
Before each episode, an "in color" promo bumper, typical of most ABC programs of the era, appears, as ABC was the last network to adopt color programming: Next... The Invaders, In Color!
Then, following the bumper, each episode begins with a cold open, to help set up the plot of the episode to come. After the prologue, the main title appears, announced by Dick Wesson:

The Invaders! A Quinn Martin Production. Starring Roy Thinnes as architect David Vincent.
(A different shot of Thinnes' face was used for the second season.) This would be followed by the opening narration (by Bill Woodson):

The Invaders, alien beings from a dying planet. Their destination: the Earth. Their purpose: to make it their world. David Vincent has seen them. For him, it began one lost night on a lonely country road, looking for a shortcut that he never found. It began with a closed deserted diner, and a man too long without sleep to continue his journey. It began with the landing of a craft from another galaxy. Now David Vincent knows that the Invaders are here, that they have taken human form. Somehow he must convince a disbelieving world that the nightmare has already begun.
Then, in a manner typical of Quinn Martin productions, Wesson would announce, "The guest stars in tonight's story...", and announce the name of each guest star (typically three or four) over a series of close-up clips of the guest stars.  Wesson would then announce "Tonight's Episode", and say the title of the episode about to be viewed, which would also appear on screen.
Also typical of Quinn Martin productions of the time, the show was divided into "Acts" labeled by the Roman numerals I-IV, preceded by a cold open.  A narration preceded Act I, and Act IV came before an Epilog with narration at the end.
Dominic Frontiere, who had provided scores for Twelve O'Clock High and The Outer Limits, provided scores for The Invaders as well.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (1967) ===


=== Season 2 (1967–68) ===


== Home media ==
CBS DVD (distributed by Paramount) has released the entire series on DVD in Regions 1, 2 & PAL 4.
On June 5, 2018, CBS Home Entertainment released The Invaders: The Complete Series on DVD in Region 1.
Thinnes also provided audio commentary for the official The Invaders DVD releases. He has also filmed special video introductions for every 
episode, which are an optional "Play" feature on the episode menus. The "in color" bumper follows each of these introductions. Since the 1960s, recurring public interest in UFO lore may have helped to revive interest in the television series, and commentary on the DVD collections acknowledges that, in private life, Thinnes has kept up a strong interest in UFO-related information.
On May 5, 2019, "classic-TV" digital/basic-cable network MeTV began weekly airings of The Invaders as part of its "Red-Eye Sci-Fi Saturday Night" late Saturday evening/early Sunday morning programming lineup.


== Spin-offs and remakes ==


=== Quinn Martin's Tales of the Unexpected (1977) ===
The pilot episode of the series, "Beachhead", was remade in 1977 for another Quinn Martin series, Quinn Martin's Tales of the Unexpected (known in the United Kingdom as Twist in the Tale), where it was retitled "The Nomads".


=== The Invaders miniseries (1995) ===
In 1995, the premise was used as the basis for a four-hour television miniseries remake titled The Invaders on Fox. Scott Bakula starred as Nolan Wood, who discovers the alien conspiracy, and Roy Thinnes very briefly appeared as David Vincent, now an old man handing the burden over to Wood.  The miniseries has been released in some countries on home video, edited into a single movie. The first part aired on November 12, 1995; part 2 aired on November 14, 1995 (both in two-hour time slots).


== Reuse of footage ==
Several seconds of footage from the opening sequence of the flying saucer approaching Earth from space appears in the opening of the episode "The Innocent Prey" of the series The Fantastic Journey. It aired on June 6, 1977. In the plot of that final episode of the series, the saucer was a prisoner transport ship of the future operated by humans that malfunctioned and crashed on Earth at night in the heavy vegetation of a jungle. The full-scale saucer used in ground scenes, however, was physically different on the outside and inside from The Invaders one.


== The Invaders abroad ==
Despite its alleged allegory of the Cold War, the series made it across the Iron Curtain into Hungary, where it was dubbed and aired under the title "Attack from an Alien Planet" (Hungarian: Támadás egy idegen bolygóról) between July 4 and September 5, 1980. The whole series was never shown, with only the black and white versions of the following 9 episodes making it to the TV screens after prime time on Friday nights, in the sequence indicated (Season/Episode): 1/1, 1/11, 1/13, 2/12, 2/14, 1/4, 2/7, 2/6, 2/21. These 9 episodes were described in the media as the complete series, with no reference made to the existence of any other episodes. Newspaper reviews tended to be critical of the show being "more fiction than science". It was nevertheless well received by viewers, as attested by references to it in popular culture at the time. Romanian state TV also broadcast both seasons sometime around 1970.


== In other media ==


=== Books ===
Ten books based on the television series have been published.

Army of the Undead by Rafe Bernard (US, Pyramid Books, 1967) – the same story as Halo Highway
The Autumn Accelerator by Peter Leslie (UK, Corgi (a Transworld imprint), 1967)
Enemies from Beyond by Keith Laumer (US, Pyramid Books, 1967)
Halo Highway by Rafe Bernard (UK, Corgi, 1967) – the same story as Army of the Undead
The Invaders by Keith Laumer (US, Pyramid Books, 1967)
Meteor Men by Keith Laumer (writing as Anthony Le Baron) (UK, Corgi, 1967)
Dam of Death by Jack Pearl (US, Whitman (a Western Publishing imprint), 1967)
The Invaders: Alien Missile Threat by Paul S. Newman (US, a Big Little Book from Whitman, 1967)
Night of the Trilobites by Peter Leslie (UK, Corgi, 1969)
The Invaders by Jim Rosin (US, Autumn Road Company, 2010)


=== Comics ===
Gold Key Comics published four issues of an Invaders comic book based upon the series in 1967–1968, years before Marvel Comics published their own, unrelated Invaders superhero series.
Whitman Publishing published a Big Little Book of the show titled Alien Missile Threat in 1967 as part of its 2000 Series (#2012).


== In popular culture ==
The struggles of David Vincent are referenced in the Frank Black song "Bad, Wicked World" (on his 1994 album Teenager of the Year): "An architect named David Vincent / A man too long without sleep / He took a wrong turn and people just laughed / [...] / Fist-throwing crusader / Against invaders"
The Northern Irish punk rock group Stiff Little Fingers took their band name from a song on the debut album of British group The Vibrators; both are a reference to the rigid or deformed fourth fingers on many of the alien invaders' hands.
MAD magazine issue No. 119 (June 1968), presented a TV satire of The Invaders titled "The Invasioners".
Plastic model kits of the UFO (flying saucer) were made by Aurora and Monogram.
The 1977 novel The Rombella Shuttle by Bill Convertito used the craft on the cover art.
The 1977 single Come Sail Away by Styx used the craft on the cover art.
In the 2002 Argentinian movie Kamchatka, which is set in 1976, the protagonists watch an episode on TV and there is an analogy between the invaders and the events of the Argentine military dictatorship of the 1970s. The leads use the alias "los Vicentes" after David Vincent character to hide their identities.
In Quentin Tarantino's 2019 movie, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, it has a scene where a transit bus bench has an advertisement for "The Invaders".


== Notes ==


=== Citations ===


=== Explanatory notes ===


== External links ==
The Invaders at IMDb
The Invaders at Classic TV History (behind-the-scene history, episodes full credits)
The Invaders informational episode Guide
The Invaders informational web site'night, Mother (film)
10-8: Officers on Duty
12 O'Clock High (TV series)
2000 Malibu Road
31st Saturn Awards
32nd Saturn Awards
33rd Saturn Awards
34th Saturn Awards
35th Saturn Awards
7th Heaven (TV series)
A Cold Night's Death
A Man Called Sloane
A Return to Salem's Lot
A Season in Purgatory
A Stranger in the Mirror
A Taste of Evil
Aaron Spelling
Adventures of Superman (TV series)
After Jimmy
Ahna Capri
Alan Armer
Alex Gerry
Alfred Hitchcock
Alfred Ryder
Alien (film)
Alien invasion
All Souls (TV series)
Aloha Paradise
American Broadcasting Company
And the Band Played On (film)
Andrew Duggan
Andrew Prine
Anne Francis
Anthony Eisley
Antimatter
Antoinette Bower
Arch Johnson
Arizona
Arthur Franz
Arthur Hill (Canadian actor)
As Good as Dead (1995 film)
At Ease (TV series)
Aurora Plastics Corporation
B.A.D. Cats
Baby Blue Marine
Back to the Streets of San Francisco
Bakersfield, California
Banyon
BarBara Luna
Barbara Barrie
Barbara Hershey
Barnaby Jones
Barry Morse
Beach Patrol (film)
Bert D'Angelo/Superstar
Beverly Hills, 90210
Big Little Book
Big Little Book series
Bill Woodson
Bill Zuckert
Black Caesar (film)
Blue Light (TV series)
Bone (1972 film)
Bowman County, North Dakota
Box car
Branded (TV series)
Buddy Faro
Burgess Meredith
Burke's Law (1963 TV series)
Burke's Law (1994 TV series)
But I Don't Want to Get Married!
CBS Home Entertainment
CBS Summer Playhouse
California
California Split
Cannon (TV series)
Caribe (American TV series)
Carol Lynley
Carter's Army
Casino (1980 film)
Catatonia
Cerebral hemorrhage
Charles Aidman
Charles Drake (actor)
Charlie's Angels
Charlie's Angels (2000 film)
Charmed
Chopper One
Chris Robinson (actor)
Christopher Shea
Clubhouse (TV series)
Cold War
Cold open
Colorado
Come Sail Away
Committee for Skeptical Inquiry
Condon Committee
Congratulations, It's a Boy!
Cool Million
Coronet Blue
Cracked Up
Cross My Heart (1987 film)
Crossings (miniseries)
Crosstown Traffic (film)
Crowhaven Farm
Cruise Into Terror
Cry Panic
Dabney Coleman
Dan August
Dana Elcar
Dana Wynter
Dark Mansions
Dark Mirror (1984 film)
David Sheiner
Dawn Wells
Day One (1989 film)
Deadly Illusion
Death Cruise
Death Sentence (1974 film)
Death at Love House
Diana Hyland
Diana Muldaur
Diane Baker
Dick Powell's Zane Grey Theatre
Dick Wesson (announcer)
Dominic Frontiere
Don't Go to Sleep
Don Dubbins
Don Gordon (actor)
Don Siegel
Donald Davis (actor)
Donald Harron
Doppelgänger
Dubbing (filmmaking)
Dynasty: The Reunion
Dynasty (1981 TV series)
Ed Begley
Eduard Franz
Edward Andrews
Edward Asner
Ellen Corby
Every Man Needs One
Family (1976 TV series)
Fantasy Island
Finder of Lost Loves
Firehouse (TV series)
Five Desperate Women
Florida
Flying saucer
Forbidden Island (TV series)
Ford Rainey
Frank Black
Frank Marth
Friends (1979 TV series)
Fritz Weaver
Full Moon High
Gene Hackman
Gene Lyons (actor)
George Adamski
Glitter (TV series)
God Told Me To
Gold Key Comics
Grass Roots (TV movie)
Green Dolphin Beat
Griff (TV series)
Guns of the Timberland
H. R. Giger
Harold Gould
Harry's Hong Kong
Hart to Hart
HeartBeat (1988 TV series)
Heaven Help Us (TV series)
Hell Up in Harlem
Hijack (1973 film)
Hit Lady
Hitched (2005 film)
Hollywood Beat
Hollywood Wives (miniseries)
Home for the Holidays (1972 film)
Honey West (TV series)
Hotel (2003 film)
Hotel (American TV series)
How Awful About Allan
Human disguise
Hungary
Hurricane
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Married a Monster from Outer Space
If Tomorrow Comes (film)
Illinois
In Broad Daylight (1971 film)
Indiana
Indianapolis
International Airport (film)
Invader (disambiguation)
Invaders (comics)
Invasion of the Body Snatchers
Iron Curtain
It's Alive (1974 film)
It's Alive III: Island of the Alive
It Lives Again
J. D. Cannon
Jack Lord
Jack Pearl
Jack Warden
Jailbirds (1991 film)
James A. Michener's Texas
James Callahan (actor)
James Daly (actor)
James Whitmore
Jane's House
Janet MacLachlan
Jason Evers
Jeanette Nolan
Joanne Linville
Joe Maross
John Ericson
John Graham (actor)
John Larch
John Lasell
John Milford
John Randolph (actor)
John Stephenson (actor)
John Zaremba
Johnny Ringo (TV series)
Joseph Campanella
Julie Sommars
Just Temporary
Kamchatka (film)
Kansas
Karen Black
Kate Bliss and the Ticker Tape Kid
Katherine Justice
Kathleen Widdoes
Keith Laumer
Ken Lynch
Kent Smith
Kevin McCarthy (actor)
Kindred: The Embraced
Kingpin (TV series)
Larry Cohen
Larry Gates
Laura Devon
Laurence Naismith
Lee Farr
Letters from Three Lovers
Life with Lucy
Lin McCarthy
Linden Chiles
List of ufologists
Little Ladies of the Night
Loose Cannons (1990 film)
Los Angeles
Louis Gossett Jr.
Love's Savage Fury
Love Boat: The Next Wave
Love Hate Love
Love on the Run (1994 film)
Lynda Day George
Lynn Loring
Lúdas Matyi (magazine)
MacGruder and Loud
Mad (magazine)
Madman of the People
Maine
Majestic 12
Making of a Male Model
Malcolm Atterbury
Malibu Shores
Marilyn Monroe
Mark Richman
Marlyn Mason
Martin Wolfson (actor)
Marvel Comics
Massarati and the Brain
Matt Houston
Max Kleven
McCarthy era
MeTV
Melrose Place
Michael Constantine
Michael McGreevey
Michael Rennie
Michael Tolan
Milton Selzer
Miniseries
Model kit
Models Inc.
Monogram (company)
Morgan Jones (actor, born 1928)
Most Wanted (1976 TV series)
Mr. Mom
Mr. and Mrs. Ryan
Murder Can Hurt You
Murder on Flight 502
Murray Hamilton
Murray Matheson
NASA
NORAD
Nan Martin
Nancy Kovack
Nancy Wickwire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York (state)
New York City
Nightingales (American TV series)
No Place to Run (film)
Norman Fell
North American Aerospace Defense Command
North Dakota
North by Northwest
Ohio
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
One of My Wives Is Missing
Only with Married Men
Oregon
Original Gangstas
Pacific Palisades (TV series)
Pamela Curran
Paramount Home Entertainment
Pat Hingle
Paul S. Newman
Peggy Lipton
Pennsylvania
People of Northern Ireland
Perfect Strangers (1984 film)
Peter Graves
Peter Leslie
Peter Mark Richman
Phillip Pine
Phyllis Thaxter
Pier 66 (film)
Punk rock
Pyramid Books
Q (1982 film)
Quatermass 2
Queen of Angels Hospital
Queens Supreme
Quentin Tarantino
Quinn Martin
Quinn Martin's Tales of the Unexpected
R.G. Armstrong
R. G. Armstrong
Ralph Bellamy
Rango (TV series)
Rattlesnake
Raygun
Raymond St. Jacques
Reginald Alec Martin
Rescue 77
Rhode Island
Rhys Williams (Welsh-American actor)
Rich Men, Single Women
Richard Anderson
Richard O'Brien (American actor)
River of Gold (1971 film)
Robert Biheller
Robert Emhardt
Robert H. Harris
Robert Knapp (actor)
Robert Walker (actor, born 1940)
Robertson Panel
Robin's Hoods
Roddy McDowall
Roger Perry
Rolling Man
Ron Hayes
Roscoe Lee Browne
Roy Thinnes
Run, Simon, Run
Russell Johnson
S.W.A.T. (1975 TV series)
Saboteur (film)
Safe Harbor (TV series)
Sally Kellerman
Satan's School for Girls (1973 film)
Satan's School for Girls (2000 film)
Satisfaction (1988 film)
Saturn Award for Best Retro Television Series on DVD
Savages (1974 film)
Savannah (TV series)
Say Goodbye, Maggie Cole
Scott Bakula
Second Red Scare
See China and Die
Shirley Knight
Shooting Stars (1983 film)
Simon Scott (actor)
Sizzle (1981 film)
Snatched (1973 film)
Soapdish
Soft focus
Special Effects (film)
Star Trek: The Original Series
Starsky & Hutch
Stephen Brooks (actor)
Stiff Little Fingers
Stop at Nothing (2001 film)
Strike Force (TV series)
Strother Martin
Styx (band)
Sublimation (phase transition)
Summerland (TV series)
Sunset Beach (TV series)
Surrender (1987 film)
Susan Oliver
Susan Strasberg
Suzanne Pleshette
T. J. Hooker
Teenager of the Year (album)
Texas
The 39 Steps (1935 film)
The Affair (1973 film)
The Ambulance
The Bait (1973 film)
The Ballad of Andy Crocker
The Best Little Girl in the World
The Bounty Man
The Boy in the Plastic Bubble
The Colbys
The Cricket on the Hearth
The Daughters of Joshua Cabe
The Death Squad (film)
The Death of Me Yet
The Dick Powell Show
The F.B.I. (TV series)
The Fantastic Journey
The Fireman's Ball (1974 film)
The French Atlantic Affair
The Fugitive (1963 TV series)
The Girl Who Came Gift-Wrapped
The Great American Beauty Contest
The Greatest American Hero
The Guns of Will Sonnett
The Heights (American TV series)
The Hope Division (film)
The House That Would Not Die
The Invaders (miniseries)
The Last Child (film)
The Law and Mr. Lee
The Legend of Valentino
The Letters (1973 film)
The Lloyd Bridges Show
The Loner (film)
The Love Boat
The Love Boat: A Valentine Voyage
The Love Boat II
The Love War
The Manhunter
The Mod Squad
The Mod Squad (film)
The Monk (1969 film)
The Most Deadly Game
The New Breed (TV series)
The New People
The Oath (1976 TV series)
The Old Man Who Cried Wolf
The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)
The Over-the-Hill Gang
The Over-the-Hill Gang Rides Again
The Pigeon (1969 film)
The Power Within (1979 film)
The Private Files of J. Edgar Hoover
The Reluctant Heroes
The Rookies
The Round Table (TV series)
The Runaways (TV series)
The San Pedro Beach Bums
The Smothers Brothers Show
The Streets of San Francisco
The Stuff
The Trackers (film)
The Untouchables (1959 TV series)
The Users (film)
The Vibrators
The Wild Women of Chastity Gulch
The Young Rebels
Theodore Sturgeon
Three O'Clock High
Titans (2000 TV series)
Transworld (Company)
Twelve O'Clock High (TV series)
Twin Peaks
Two for the Money (1972 film)
University Hospital (TV series)
Utah
Vegas (1978 TV series)
Velvet (film)
Venice Medical
Vermont
Virginia
Waikiki (film)
Wake Me When the War Is Over
Wanted (2005 TV series)
Washington, D.C.
Wayne Rogers
West Virginia
Western Publishing
Whit Bissell
Whitman Publishing
Wicked Stepmother
Wild Women (1970 film)
Wild and Wooly
Will Geer
William Sargent
William Smithers
William Talman (actor)
William Windom (actor)
Winnetka Road
Wyoming
Yuma (1971 film)
Zina Bethune
http://www.tv.com/the-invaders/show/2350/summary.html
http://www.dvdempire.com/Exec/v4_item.asp?item_id=1389504
http://www.dvdempire.com/Exec/v4_item.asp?item_id=1431311
http://invaderstvshow.byethost18.com/
http://www.lyricsty.com/frank-black-bad-wicked-world-lyrics.html
http://www.classictvhistory.com/EpisodeGuides/invaders.html
https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B000RHOJDU
https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B001KQO0AE/
https://johnkennethmuir.wordpress.com/2012/03/11/cult-tv-blogging-the-fantastic-journey-the-innocent-prey-june-6-1977/
https://web.archive.org/web/20161020072758/http://www.theinvaders.co.uk/
http://home.earthlink.net/~peredhil/Invaders.html
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0061265/
http://tvshowsondvd.com/news/Invaders-The-Complete-Series/24056
https://books.google.com/books?id=d4iACgAAQBAJ&q=%22The+Innocent%22+,+%22queen+of+angels+hospital%22
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/05/10/how-the-pentagon-started-taking-ufos-seriously
https://www.nytimes.com/1979/10/14/archives/ufo-files-the-untold-story.html
http://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/pl.cgi?254033
