The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King is a 2003 epic fantasy adventure film directed by Peter Jackson from a screenplay by Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, and Jackson. It is based on 1955's The Return of the King, the third volume of the novel The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien. The sequel to 2002's  The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers, the film is the final instalment in The Lord of the Rings trilogy. It features an ensemble cast including Elijah Wood, Ian McKellen, Liv Tyler, Viggo Mortensen, Sean Astin, Cate Blanchett, John Rhys-Davies, Bernard Hill, Billy Boyd, Dominic Monaghan, Orlando Bloom, Hugo Weaving, Miranda Otto, David Wenham, Karl Urban, John Noble, Andy Serkis, Ian Holm, and Sean Bean. Continuing the plot of the previous film, Frodo, Sam and Gollum are making their final way toward Mount Doom to destroy the One Ring, unaware of Gollum's true intentions, while Merry, Pippin, Gandalf, Aragorn, Legolas, Gimli and the others join forces together against Sauron and his legions in Minas Tirith.
The Return of the King was financed and distributed by American studio New Line Cinema, but filmed and edited entirely in Jackson's native New Zealand, concurrently with the other two parts of the trilogy. It premiered on 1 December 2003 at the Embassy Theatre in Wellington, and was then released on 17 December 2003 in the US and on 18 December 2003 in New Zealand. The film was acclaimed by both critics and audiences, who considered it to be a landmark in filmmaking and the fantasy film genre, and a satisfying conclusion to the trilogy, with praise for the visual effects, performances, action sequences, direction, screenplay, musical score, costume design, emotional depth, scope and story. It grossed over $1.1 billion worldwide, making it the highest-grossing film of 2003 and the second highest-grossing film of all time at the time of release, as well as the highest-grossing film ever released by New Line Cinema.Like the previous films in the trilogy, The Return of the King is widely recognised as one of the greatest and most influential films ever made. The film received numerous accolades; at the 76th Academy Awards, it won all eleven awards for which it was nominated, including Best Picture, the first fantasy film to do so and tying with 1959's Ben-Hur and 1997's Titanic as the movie with the most Academy Award wins. It also became the second film series whose entries have all won Best Visual Effects, after the original Star Wars trilogy.


== Plot ==
The hobbit, Sméagol, is fishing with his cousin Déagol, who discovers the One Ring in the river. Sméagol's mind is ensnared by the Ring, and he kills his cousin for it. Increasingly corrupted physically and mentally, he retreats into the Misty Mountains and becomes known as Gollum.
Centuries later, during the War of the Ring, Gandalf leads Aragorn, Legolas, Gimli, and King Théoden of Rohan to Isengard, where they reunite with Merry and Pippin. Gandalf retrieves Saruman's palantír, and the group returns to Edoras to celebrate their victory at Helm's Deep. Pippin looks into the palantír, seeing Sauron and a burning tree. Gandalf deduces that the enemy plans to attack Gondor's capital Minas Tirith; he rides there to warn Gondor's corrupt steward Denethor. Pippin, who accompanies him, swears fealty to Denethor, whose now-dead heir Boromir had saved his life; on Gandalf's instruction, Pippin triggers the lighting of the beacons, which call for help from Rohan.
Frodo, who carries the Ring, and Sam continue their journey towards Mordor, unaware that Gollum, now their guide, plans to betray them and take the Ring for himself. The trio witness the Witch-king of Angmar, lord of the nine Nazgûl, setting off towards Gondor with his army of Orcs. Gollum conspires to frame Sam for eating food supplies and desiring the Ring; influenced by the growing power of the Ring, Frodo is taken in by the deception, and orders Sam to go home. Gollum then tricks Frodo into venturing into the lair of the giant spider Shelob. Frodo narrowly escapes and confronts Gollum, who falls down a chasm after a scuffle. Shelob discovers, paralyses, and binds Frodo, but is wounded and driven away by a returning Sam, who, mourning Frodo's apparent death, takes the Ring. Sam realises his mistake when a group of Orcs takes Frodo captive but manages to rescue Frodo as the Orcs fight among themselves. Now inside Mordor, the hobbits continue towards Mount Doom, their destination.
As King Théoden gathers his army, Elrond tells Aragorn that Arwen is dying, having refused to leave Middle-earth. Elrond gives Aragorn Andúril, reforged from the shards of King Elendil's sword Narsil, and urges him to commit to claiming Gondor's throne, to which he is the heir. Joined by Legolas and Gimli, Aragorn travels the Paths of the Dead, and pledges to release the ghosts there from their curse should they come to Gondor's aid. Meanwhile, Faramir, who was earlier overwhelmed and driven back to Minas Tirith by the Witch-king, is gravely wounded in a suicide charge; believing his son to be dead, Denethor falls into madness. Gandalf marshals the defenders, but the huge Orc army breaks into the city. Denethor attempts to burn himself and Faramir on a pyre, but Pippin alerts Gandalf and they rescue Faramir. Denethor, set ablaze and in agony, jumps to his death.
Théoden arrives and leads his army against the Orcs. Despite initial success against Orcs in the ensuing battle, they are decimated by the Oliphaunt-riding Haradrim and the Witch-king mortally wounds Théoden; however, his niece Éowyn slays the Witch-king with Merry's help. Théoden dies in his niece's arms. Aragorn then arrives with his Army of the Dead, who overcome Sauron's forces. Their oath is fulfilled, and the Dead are released from their curse. Aragorn decides to march on Mordor to distract Sauron from Frodo, now extremely weak, and Sam; all of Sauron's remaining forces march to meet Aragorn's diversion, allowing the hobbits to reach Mount Doom. Gollum, who survived his earlier fall, attacks them, but Frodo still manages to enter the mountain. There, he succumbs to the Ring's power, putting it on his finger, but Gollum manages to bite off his finger and reclaim it. They struggle together and stumble off the ledge. Frodo clings to it with one hand as remorse and guilt flood his mind in the wake of his succumbing to the Ring when Sam's unwavering faith in his friend demands Frodo reach for Sam's stretched hand, saving Frodo's life. Gollum falls and dies; the Ring, which fell with him, disintegrates in the lava, causing Barad-dûr to crumble as the Eye of Sauron explodes, destroying the Dark Lord once and for all. Aragorn's army emerges victorious as its enemies and the lands of Mordor collapse into the earth, and Mount Doom erupts, with Frodo and Sam narrowly escaping the lava.
Gandalf rescues the hobbits with the help of eagles, and the surviving Fellowship is happily reunited in Minas Tirith. Aragorn is crowned King of Gondor and marries Arwen. The Hobbits return home to the Shire, where Sam marries Rosie Cotton. Four years later, Frodo, still plagued by the pain  of his wound inflicted by the Witch-king and suffering from trauma, departs Middle-earth for the Undying Lands with his uncle Bilbo, Gandalf, and the Elves. He leaves Sam the Red Book of Westmarch, which details their adventures. Sam returns to the Shire, where he embraces Rosie and their children.


== Cast ==

Like the preceding films in the trilogy, The Return of the King has an ensemble cast, and some of the cast and their respective characters include:

Elijah Wood as Frodo Baggins: A young hobbit who continues his quest to destroy the Ring, which continues to torture him.
Ian McKellen as Gandalf the White: An Istari wizard who travels to aid the Men of Gondor, acting as a general at the Siege of Gondor.
Viggo Mortensen as Aragorn: A Dúnedain ranger who must finally face his destiny as King of Gondor.
Sean Astin as Samwise Gamgee: Better known as Sam, Frodo's loyal hobbit gardener and companion.
Andy Serkis as Sméagol / Gollum: A wretched and treacherous creature who was once one of the river-folk (an extinct race of hobbits) and now guides Frodo and Sam into Mordor. The first scene in the film portrays him in his former life as Sméagol, his murder of his friend Déagol for possession of the Ring, as well as his degeneration into Gollum.
Billy Boyd as Peregrin Took: Better known as Pippin, a hobbit who looks into the palantír and later becomes an esquire of Gondor.
Dominic Monaghan as Meriadoc Brandybuck: Better known as Merry, a cousin of Frodo's who becomes an esquire of Rohan.
John Rhys-Davies as Gimli: A dwarf warrior and companion to Aragorn along with Legolas.
Rhys-Davies also voices Treebeard: the ent leader.
Orlando Bloom as Legolas: An elven prince of Mirkwood and skilled archer who aids Aragorn in his quest to reclaim the throne.
Bernard Hill as Théoden: The King of Rohan who, after triumphing at Helm's Deep, is preparing his troops for the Battle of the Pelennor Fields.
Miranda Otto as Éowyn: Théoden's niece, who wishes to prove herself in battle and starts to fall in love with Aragorn, who does not return her love. In the extended cut of the film, she finds love with Faramir when they are both residing in the Houses of Healing.
David Wenham as Faramir: A son of the Stewards of Gondor and head of the Gondorian Rangers defending Osgiliath, who seeks his father's love in vain.
Karl Urban as Éomer: Éowyn's brother, who serves as Chief Marshal of the Riders of Rohan and heir to his uncle's throne.
Hugo Weaving as Elrond: The Lord of Rivendell who must convince Aragorn to take up the throne.
Liv Tyler as Arwen: Elrond's daughter and Aragorn's true love, who gives up her immortal life for Aragorn.
Cate Blanchett as Galadriel: The Elven-Queen of Lothlórien who is aware the time of the elves is at an end.
John Noble as Denethor: The corrupt Steward of Gondor and father of Boromir and Faramir, whose grief over Boromir's death and despair over Mordor's superior numbers drive him into madness during the Siege of Gondor.
Ian Holm as Bilbo Baggins: Frodo's elderly uncle, who has rapidly aged after giving away the Ring.
Sean Bean as Boromir: Faramir's older brother and a fallen companion of Aragorn, who appears in a flashback of his death at the end of The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring and in the extended cut when his father has a hallucination.
Marton Csokas as Celeborn the Wise: The Elven-King of Lothlórien.
Lawrence Makoare as the Witch-king of Angmar: The lord of the Nazgûl, who leads Mordor's assault on Minas Tirith.
Makoare also plays Gothmog: An Orc commander, who is voiced by Craig Parker.
Thomas Robins as Déagol: Sméagol's cousin, who is killed by Sméagol, when the former finds the One Ring in the river they are fishing in.The following appear only in the Extended Edition
Christopher Lee as Saruman the White: An Istari wizard, formerly the head of the Istari Order and its White Council, who is now trapped by Treebeard until he is killed by his own servant, Gríma.
Brad Dourif as Gríma Wormtongue: Saruman's sycophantic, treacherous servant, who is shot by Legolas after stabbing his own master.
Bruce Spence as the Mouth of Sauron: Sauron's ambassador at the Black Gate.There are cameos from Peter Jackson, Richard Taylor, Gino Acevedo, Rick Porras and Andrew Lesnie on the Corsair ship, although all of them but Jackson appear only in the Extended Edition. Jackson also has another unofficial cameo, as Sam's hand stepping into view when he confronts Shelob. Sean Astin's daughter played Sam and Rosie's older daughter Elanor in the last scene of the film; in the same scene, Sarah McLeod's daughter plays their younger son. Jackson's children also cameo as Gondorian extras, while Christian Rivers played a Gondorian soldier guarding the Beacon Pippin lights, and is later seen wounded. Royd Tolkien cameos as a Ranger in Osgiliath, while in the Extended Edition Howard Shore appears as a celebrating soldier at Edoras. Additionally, four of the designers of The Lord of the Rings Strategy Battle Game are featured as Rohirrim at the Pelennor. At the end of the film, during the closing credits, each cast member gets a sketched portrait morphed with the real photograph beside their name, which were sketched by Alan Lee, an idea suggested by Ian McKellen.


== Comparison to the source material ==

As with all of Peter Jackson's movie adaptions of The Lord of the Rings, many events, timelines, and geographic distances are compressed or simplified. Most major events from the books are included, though some are significantly altered. Some events and details seen in the film are not found in the books.The film version of The Return of the King contains major scenes from the middle of Tolkien's The Two Towers, such as the attack by Shelob and the palantír subplot, as Jackson realigned events of the film to fit the timeline from the book's Appendices, rather than the interlaced order of the main narrative. However, the plot of the second half of Book III is either completely omitted (chapter "The Road to Isengard") or only shown in one scene (chapter "The Voice of Saruman"). Saruman's murder by Gríma (seen only in the Extended Edition) is moved into the Isengard visit because of the cutting of the Scouring of the Shire.The basis of Elrond and Arwen's subplot arguing about Arwen's fate is derived from the Appendices, but it is largely extended in the film, as is Arwen and Elrond's relevance to the story.In the film, overwhelming grief over the death of Boromir has driven Denethor to despair, and he has given up any hope of defeating Sauron before Gandalf arrives in Minas Tirith. Thus, the muster of Gondor is absent from the film. In the book, he has already ordered the lighting of the beacons before Gandalf's arrival, while he refuses to light them in the film, and the sequence where Pippin secretly lights them himself was invented for the movie. The film only hints at Denethor's use of the palantír which drives him mad, information revealed in the Pyre scene, which includes Shadowfax and is more violent than the book. Aware of the very long distance between Rath Dínen and the front of the out-thrust battlement, Jackson has Denethor jump off the Citadel in addition to burning himself on the Pyre, one of the earliest changes.The muster of Rohan, and the subplot in which the Rohirrim are aided by the primitive Drúedain during their journey to the besieged Gondor are excised from the film. The Red Arrow brought by a messenger from Gondor to ask for Rohan's aid is absent. Éowyn's presence on the battlefield is unknown to the reader until she takes off her helmet, but in the film the audience is aware, as it would have been difficult to have Miranda Otto playing a man. When hope seems lost, Gandalf comforts Pippin by telling him of the Undying Lands, based on a descriptive passage in the book's final chapter.The film altered the circumstances of Théoden's death; his death speech, in which he names Éomer the new king in the book, is trimmed and delivered to Éowyn instead of Merry, with an earlier scene in the Extended Edition even implying that Éowyn is next in line for the throne. Théoden's rallying speech ("To death!") before the initial charge in the film is spoken by Éomer in the book when he believes that both Théoden and Éowyn have been killed in combat with the Witch King.The Extended Edition presents shortened scenes from the book's chapters in the Houses of Healing: The Warden, the talk of Athelas, the comical conversation with the herb-master, the woman Ioreth and her saying about a King's healing hands and the subsequent realising of Aragorn's true identity are left out altogether. The romance that develops between Éowyn and Faramir during their recoveries in the Houses of Healing is largely cut, presumably to keep the focus on Aragorn and Arwen; the subplot is briefly referenced in the Extended Edition, with a scene where the two hold hands.Gollum's fall into the lava of Mount Doom was rewritten for the film, as the writers felt that simply having Gollum slip and fall was anticlimactic. Originally, an even greater deviation was planned: Frodo would heroically push Gollum over the ledge to destroy him and the Ring, but the production team realised that that would make it look as if Frodo was murdering Gollum. Instead, they had Frodo and Gollum struggle for possession of the Ring.
In addition to the absent footage from the film are the other major attacks by Sauron on various regions of Middle-earth, referenced only briefly in the main text of The Return of the King, and expanded upon in the Appendices; the invasion of Rohan by the Orcs of Moria, the attacks on Lothlórien and the Woodland Realm of Thranduil by the forces of Dol Guldur, and the attack on Dale and the Lonely Mountain by a force of Easterlings, events hinted at in a comment by Legolas in the book.There are several changes in the Battle of the Black Gate: Merry is not present there in the book, Pippin does not kill a troll as he does in the novel (instead, Aragorn fights one), the eagles fight and defeat some of the mounted Nazgûl, and Aragorn kills the Mouth of Sauron in the extended edition of the film but not in the book.Although the film runs for another approximately 20 minutes after the climactic Downfall of Barad-dûr, many following events from the book are omitted or altered in the film. Aragorn's coronation takes place in form of a great ceremony in the Citadel of Minas Tirith, opposed to the book, where Aragorn is crowned in his tent on the Pelennor Fields before entering the city. Omitted entirely are the camp at the Field of Cormallen, Aragorn's business in Minas Tirith, Aragorn and Arwen's wedding, Galadriel and Celeborn being present at the ceremonies and their subsequent travelling along with the company, Théoden's funeral at Edoras, the complete journey back to the Shire with stops at Rivendell and Bree, and the Scouring of the Shire, which was seen by the screenwriters as anticlimactic. The film also left out the character epilogues:
For example, Samwise Gamgee stayed in the Shire even when most of the rest of the Fellowship went to Valinor (save for Gimli, Aragorn, Legolas, Merry and Pippin), during which he would make changes and additions to the Red Book of Westmarch, which he inherited from Frodo, just as in the film, in which he would add a section titled "Herb Lore of The Shire", which was a section on Pipeweed, the plant Hobbits and other folk of Middle Earth, like Gandalf, would smoke through pipes, as well as various poems. Shortly after his contribution to the Red Book, he served seven consecutive seven year terms as mayor of the Shire, during which he had children with Rosie Cotton who each took the last name of "Gardner" after their father's planting of the Mallorn Tree that replaced the Party Tree, which was destroyed during the Scouring. He did, however, go to Valinor after Rosie died, and before he did, he gave the Red Book to Elinor, one of his daughters.  
The books also expanded on Aragorn's time as king of Gondor and Arnor post-reuniting, and reveals that Arwen accepted a life as a mortal, and died shortly after Aragorn.   
Merry and Pippin also returned to the Shire, but unlike Sam and Frodo, they didn't eventually journey to Valinor. Pippin inherited his father's title as "Master of Buckland" and despite the perils he and Merry endured that almost cost them their lives, Pippin still had his adventurous spirit. He also reviewed many gifts from Eomer and his sister, Eowyn, and helped the Hobbits learn more about lands beyond the Shire through scholarly articles. He even returned to Rivendell multiple times. When he and Merry died, they were buried beside their friends, Aragorn and Arwen in Minas Tirith, where they spent some of their final days after a stint in Rohan.  
Legolas and Gimli make and keep promises in the books to show the other important places to them: First, Gimli shows Legolas the caverns of Aglarond, which Legolas is stunned by, then they walk in the Fangorn Forest, where they then make their way to Isengard where they bid farewell to the Fellowship, after which, they would each go back to their own lands, with Gimli even founding a Dwarven colony in the Glittering Caves. They would, however, reunite to help with the rebuilding and improving of Minas Tirith. They would be the last of the Fellowship to sail for Valinor, departing after the death of their friend Aragorn, Legolas would build a ship for him and Gimli to sail to Valinor.   
Lastly, Frodo would serve as Deputy Mayor of The Shire until a wound caused by a stab from the Witch King which flared up every year on the anniversary of said stabbing forced him to resign, after which, he would sail to Valinor to receive healing and peace for the rest of his days.


== Production ==

The production of The Lord of the Rings series was the first where three separate entries were written and shot simultaneously (excluding pick up shoots). Jackson found The Return of the King the easiest of the films to make, because it contained the climax of the story. The Return of the King was originally the second of two planned films under Miramax from January 1997 to August 1998, and more or less in its finished structure as the first film was to end with the Battle of Helm's Deep in The Two Towers. Filming took place under multiple units across New Zealand, between 11 October 1999 and 22 December 2000, with pick up shoots for six weeks in 2003 before the film's release.


=== Design ===
Jackson's Middle-earth was primarily designed by Alan Lee and John Howe, who had earlier illustrated editions of Tolkien's books. It was created by Weta Workshop, who handled all the trilogy's weapons, armour, miniatures, prosthetics, and creatures; the Art Department built the sets. Richard Taylor headed Weta, while Grant Major and Dan Hennah organised the planning and building.
The city of Minas Tirith, glimpsed briefly in both the previous two films, is seen fully in this film, and with it the Gondorian civilisation. The enormous soundstage was built at Dry Creek Quarry, outside Wellington, from the Helm's Deep set. That set's gate became Minas Tirith's second, while the Hornburg exterior became that of the Extended Edition's scene where Gandalf confronts the Witch-king. New structures included the 8m tall Gate, with broken and unbroken versions, with a working opening and closing mechanism, with its engravings inspired by the Baptistry of San Giovanni. There were also four levels of streets with heraldic motifs for every house, as inspired by Siena.The Citadel's exterior was in the Stone Street Studios backlot, using forced perspective. It contained the withered White Tree, built from polystyrene by Brian Massey and the Greens Department with real branches, influenced by ancient and gnarled Lebanese olive trees. The interior was within a three-storey former factory in Wellington, its colours influenced by Charlemagne's Chapel, with a throne for Denethor carved from stone, and polystyrene statues of past kings. The Gondorian armour is designed to represent an evolution from the Númenóreans of the first film's prologue, with a simplified sea bird motif. 16th-century Italian and German armour served as inspiration, while civilians wear silver and blacks as designed by Ngila Dickson, continuing an ancient/medieval Mediterranean Basin look.Minas Morgul, the Staircase and Tower of Cirith Ungol as well as Shelob's Lair were designed by Howe, with the Morgul road using forced perspective into a bluescreened miniature. Howe's design of Minas Morgul was inspired from the experience of having a wisdom tooth pulled out: in the same way, the Orcs have put their twisted designs on to a former Gondorian city. Cirith Ungol was based on Tolkien's design, but when Richard Taylor felt it as "boring", it was redesigned with more tipping angles. The interior set, like Minas Tirith, was built as a few multiple levels that numerous camera takes would suggest a larger structure.The third film introduces the enormous spider Shelob. Shelob was designed in 1999, with the body based on a tunnelweb spider and the head with numerous growths selected by Peter Jackson's children from one of many sculpts. Jackson himself took great joy in planning the sequence, being an arachnophobe himself. Shelob's Lair was inspired by sandstone and sculpted from the existing Caverns of Isengard set.The Return of the King also brings into focus the Dead Men of Dunharrow and the evil Haradrim from the south of Middle-earth, men who ride the mûmakil. The Dead Men have a Celtic influence, as well as lines and symmetry to reflect their morbid state, while their underground city is influenced by Petra. The Haradrim were highly influenced by African culture, until Philippa Boyens expressed concern over the possibility of offensiveness, so the finished characters instead bear influence from Kiribati, in terms of weaving armour from bamboo, and the Aztecs, in use of jewellery. Also built was a single dead mûmak. Other minor cultures include the Corsairs, with an exotic, swarthy look, and the Grey Havens, Elven structures adapted to stone, with influence from J. M. W. Turner paintings.


=== Principal photography ===
The Return of the King was shot during 2000, though Astin's coverage from Gollum's attempt to separate Frodo and Sam was filmed on 24 November 1999, when floods in Queenstown interrupted the focus on The Fellowship of the Ring. Some of the earliest scenes shot for the film were in fact shot last. Hobbiton, home of the Hobbits, was shot in January 2000 with early scenes from The Fellowship of the Ring, with the exterior shot at a Matamata farm, while interior scenes were shot at Stone Street Studios in Wellington, shared with the Grey Havens sequence. Due to the high emotions of filming the scene, the cast were in despair when they were required to shoot it three times, due to a continuity flaw in Sean Astin's costume, and then negatives producing out-of-focus reels. Also shared with the previous films was the Rivendell interior in May.
The Battle of the Black Gate was filmed in April at the Rangipo Desert, a former minefield. New Zealand soldiers were hired as extras while guides were on the lookout for unexploded mines. Also a cause for concern were Monaghan and Boyd's scale doubles during a charge sequence. In the meantime, Wood, Astin and Serkis filmed at Mount Ruapehu for the Mount Doom exteriors. In particular, they spent two hours shooting Sam lifting Frodo on to his back with cross-camera coverage.Scenes shot in June were the Paths of the Dead across various locations, including Putangirua Pinnacles. In July the crew shot some Shelob scenes, and in August and September time was spent on the scenes in Isengard. Monaghan and Boyd tried numerous takes of their entrance, stressing the word "weed" as they smoked pipe-weed. Christopher Lee spent his part of his scene mostly alone, though McKellen and Hill arrived on the first day for a few lines to help.Edoras exteriors were shot in October. The Ride of the Rohirrim, where Théoden leads the charge into the Orc army, was filmed in Twizel with 150 extras on horseback. The Battle of the Pelennor Fields has more extensive use of computer-generated imagery, in contrast to the more extensive use of live action in the Battle of Helm's Deep in the second film. Also filmed were the attempts by Faramir to recapture Osgiliath, as were scenes in the city itself. At this point production was very hectic, with Jackson moving around ten units per day, and production finally wrapped on the Minas Tirith sets, as well as second units shooting parts of the siege. Just as the Hobbit actors' first scene was hiding from a Ringwraith under a tree, their last scene was the bluescreened reaction shot of the inhabitants of Minas Tirith bowing to them.


=== Pick-ups ===
The 2003 pick-ups were filmed in the Wellington studio car park, with many parts of sets and blue-screens used to finish off scenes, which the design team had to work 24 hours to get the right sets ready for a particular day. The shoot continued for two months, and became an emotional time of farewells for the cast and crew. The film has the most extensive list of re-shoots given for the trilogy. Jackson took his time to re-shoot Aragorn's coronation, rushed into a single day under second unit director Geoff Murphy on 21 December 2000. Jackson also re-shot scenes in and around Mount Doom, and Théoden's death, right after Bernard Hill was meant to wrap.There was also the new character of Gothmog. This was a major new design addition for the film, as Jackson felt the Mordor Orcs were "pathetic" compared to the Uruk-hai of the second film after watching assembly cuts, and thus Weta Workshop created grotesque new "über Orcs" as antagonists for the audience to focus on. Christian Rivers also redesigned the Witch-king and all of his scenes were re-shot, because of confusion from non-readers over whether or not Sauron was on the battlefield.With the positive response to Bloom, Legolas was given a fight with a mûmak, and Howard Shore also appeared in a cameo during Legolas and Gimli's drinking game at Edoras. The final scenes shot were Aragorn escaping the Skull avalanche, and Frodo finishing his book. The cast also received various props associated with their characters, although John Rhys-Davies burned his final Gimli prosthetic. Viggo Mortensen headbutted the stunt team goodbye. Pick-ups ended on 27 June 2003.Scenes shot afterwards included various live-action shots of Riders for the Battle of the Pelennor Fields and a reaction shot of Serkis as Gollum finally realises Frodo intends to destroy the Ring, shot in Jackson's house. For the Extended DVD, in March 2004 Jackson created a few shots of skulls rolling over for the avalanche scene; this was the final piece of footage ever shot for the trilogy, and Jackson noted that it must be the first time a director had shot scenes for a film after it had already won the Oscar.


=== Editing ===
Post-production began in November 2002, with the completion of the 4½ hour assembly cut of the film that Annie Collins had been completing over 2001 and 2002, from 4-hour dailies. For example, Théoden leading the charge went from 150 minutes of takes to a finished 90 seconds. Jackson reunited with longtime collaborator Jamie Selkirk to edit the final film. Like The Two Towers, they would have to deal with multiple storylines, and Jackson paid attention to each storyline at a time before deciding where to intercut. Most importantly they spent three weeks working on the last 45 minutes of the film, for appropriate intercutting and leaving out scenes such as the Mouth of Sauron, and the fates of characters like Legolas, Gimli, Éowyn and Faramir. The film inherited scenes originally planned to go into the second film, including the reforging of Narsil, Gollum's backstory, and Saruman's exit. But the Saruman scene posed a structural problem: killing off the second film's villain when the plot has Sauron as the main villain. Despite pick-ups and dubs, the scene was cut, causing controversy with fans and Saruman actor Christopher Lee, as well as a petition to restore the scene. Lee nonetheless contributed to the DVDs and was at the Copenhagen premiere, although he said he would never understand the reason for the cut and his relationship with Jackson was chilly. They would, however, later reconcile upon Lee's casting in Jackson's Hobbit films. Jackson only had a lock on 5 out of 10 reels, and had to churn out 3 reels in 3 weeks to help finish the film. It was finally completed on 12 November 2003. Jackson never had a chance to view the film in full due to the hectic schedule, and only saw the film from beginning to end on 1 December at the Wellington premiere; according to Elijah Wood, his response was "yup, it's good, pretty good".


=== Visual effects ===

The Return of the King contains 1,489 visual effect shots, nearly three times the number from the first film and almost twice that of the second. As with the two previous films, Jim Rygiel served as the visual effects supervisor. Visual effects work began with Alan Lee and Mark Lewis compositing various photographs of New Zealand landscape to create the digital arena of the Pelennor Fields in November 2002. Jackson and Christian Rivers used computers to plan the enormous battle up until February 2003, when the shots were shown to Weta Digital. To their astonishment, 60 planned shots had gone up to 250, and 50,000 characters were now 200,000. Nevertheless, they pressed on, soon delivering 100 shots a week, 20 a day, and as the deadline neared within the last two months, often working until 2 am.For the battle, they recorded 450 motions for the MASSIVE digital horses (though deaths were animated), and also had to deal with late additions in the film, such as Trolls bursting through Minas Tirith's gates as well as the creatures that pull Grond to the gate, and redoing a shot of two mûmakil Éomer takes down that had originally taken six months in two days. On a similar note of digital creatures, Shelob's head sculpture was scanned by a Canadian company for 10 times more detail than Weta had previously been able to capture.Like the previous films, there are also extensive morphs between digital doubles for the actors. This time, there was Sam falling off Shelob, where the morph takes place as Astin hits the ground. Legolas attacking a mûmak required numerous transitions to and fro, and Gollum's shots of him having recovered the One Ring and falling into the Crack of Doom were fully animated. For the latter scene, as well as the scene in which Mount Doom erupts and Frodo and Sam escape from the volcano, the help of the company Next Limit Technologies and their software RealFlow was required to simulate the lava. The King of the Dead is played by an actor in prosthetics, and his head occasionally morphs to a more skull-like digital version, depending on the character's mood. The Mouth of Sauron also had his mouth enlarged 200% for unsettling effect.The Return of the King also has practical effects. In the Pyre of Denethor sequence, as the Steward of Gondor throws Pippin out of the Tomb, John Noble threw a size double named Fon onto a prostrate Billy Boyd, who immediately pushed his head into camera to complete the illusion. A few burning torches were also reflected off a plate of glass and into the camera for when Gandalf's horse Shadowfax kicks Denethor onto the pyre. Because of Jackson's requirement for complete representation of his fantasy world, numerous miniatures were built, such as 1:72 scale miniature of Minas Tirith, which rises 7m high and is 6.5m in diameter. 1:14 scale sections of the city were also required, and the Extended Edition scene of the collapsing City of the Dead has 80,000 small skulls, amounting in total to a single cubic meter. The miniatures team concluded in November with the Black Gate, after 1000 days of shooting, and the final digital effects shot done was the Ring's destruction, on 25 November.


=== Sound effects ===
The Sound department spent the early part of the year searching for the right sounds. A Tasmanian devil was used to create Shelob's shriek, which in turn gave inspiration for Weta's animators, while the mûmakil is the beginning and end of a lion roar. Human screams and a donkey screech were mixed into Sauron's fall and broken glass was used for the collapsing sounds. For missile trading during Minas Tirith's siege, construction workers dropped actual 2 ton stone blocks previously lifted by a construction crane. Mixing began at a new studio on 15 August, although unfinished building work caused some annoyances. The mixers finished on 15 November, after three months of non-stop work.


=== Score ===

The music was composed by Howard Shore, who previously composed the first two parts of the trilogy. Shore watched the assembly cut of the film, and had to write seven minutes of music per day to keep up with the schedule. The score sees the full introduction of the Gondor theme, originally heard during Boromir's speeches at the Council of Elrond in The Fellowship of the Ring and at Osgiliath in The Two Towers' Extended Edition. Shore also used the Gondor theme with the new ascending coda (which is unique to this film) in his score for the trailer of the film.
The score features the London Philharmonic Orchestra, London Voices, the London Oratory School Schola and featured vocal soloists. The score is the most expansive of the three: scoring effectively the entire movie length, not including additional music written for the trailer and various alternate versions released to the public. It also uses the biggest forces in the series: sections of the score call for two sets of timpani, eight trumpets (and possibly a similar increase in the size of the horn, trombone and tuba section, as well), 85 singers in the mixed choir with additional players for all-male and all-female sections, over fifty in the boy choir and many instrumentalist "bands" playing Celtic and eastern instruments such as tin whistle or pan flute, on stage or off of it. One piece of music required an instrument invented and crafted especially for the film: a fiddle with four pairs of strings instead of single strings.Actors Billy Boyd, Viggo Mortensen and Liv Tyler also contributed to the film's music. Boyd sings on screen as Faramir charges towards Osgiliath, Mortensen sings on screen as he is crowned King, and in the Extended Edition Tyler sings as Aragorn heals Éowyn.
Renée Fleming, Ben Del Maestro, Sissel Kyrkjebø and James Galway also contribute to the soundtrack as featured soloists. Fleming sings as Arwen has a vision of her son and when Gollum recovers the One Ring. Del Maestro sings when Gandalf lights his staff to save fleeing Gondorian soldiers from Osgiliath as the Nazgûl attack and as the eagles arrive at the Black Gates. Galway plays the flute and whistle as Frodo and Sam climb Mount Doom and as they return to the shire. Sissel sings "Asea Aranion", which was originally meant to score the Houses of Healing scene. The end title song, "Into the West", was composed by Shore with lyrics by Fran Walsh. Annie Lennox (formerly of Eurythmics) performed it and also received songwriting credit. The song was partially inspired by the premature death from cancer of a young New Zealand filmmaker named Cameron Duncan who had befriended Peter Jackson.


== Release ==


=== Theatrical ===
After two years of attention and acclaim since the release of The Fellowship of the Ring, audience and critical anticipation for the final entry was extremely high. The world premiere was held in Wellington's Embassy Theatre, on 1 December 2003, and was attended by the director and many of the stars. It was estimated that over 100,000 people lined the streets, more than a quarter of the city's population.


=== Home media ===
The theatrical edition of the film was released on VHS and DVD on 25 May 2004. The DVD was a 2-disc set with extras on the second disc. The theatrical DVD sets for the two previous films were released eight months after the films were released, but Return of the King's set was completed in five because it did not have to market a sequel (the previous films had to wait for footage of their sequels to become available for a ten-minute preview). However, it contained a seven-minute trailer of the entire trilogy.
The Return of the King followed the precedent set by its predecessors by releasing an Extended Edition (251 minutes) on 14 December 2004 in the UK and US, with new editing and added special effects and music, along with four commentaries and six hours of supplementary material. The final ten minutes comprises a listing of the charter members of the official fan club who had paid for three-year charter membership.A collectors' box set was also released, which included the Extended Set plus a sculpture of Minas Tirith and a bonus 50-minute music documentary DVD, Howard Shore: Creating The Lord of the Rings Symphony: A Composer's Journey Through Middle-earth. The DVD has a DTS-ES soundtrack. The DVD also features two humorous Easter Eggs, one where Dominic Monaghan plays a German interviewer with Elijah Wood via satellite and another where Vince Vaughn and Ben Stiller attempt to convince Jackson to make a sequel, originally shown at the 2004 MTV Movie Awards. Both can be accessed via a Ring icon on the last page of both Disc 1 and 2's scene indexes. In August 2006, a Limited Edition of The Return of the King was released. This Limited Edition contains two discs; the first is a two-sided DVD containing both the Theatrical and Extended editions of the film. The second disc is a bonus disc that contains a new behind-the-scenes documentary.
The theatrical Blu-ray release was released in the United States in April 2010. The individual Blu-ray disc of The Return of the King was released in September 2010 with the same special features as the complete trilogy release, except there was no digital copy. The Extended Edition was released in the United States in June 2011. It has a runtime of 263 minutes.The Return of the King was released in Ultra HD Blu-ray on 30 November 2020 in the United Kingdom and on 1 December 2020 in the United States, along with the other films of the trilogy, including both the theatrical and the extended editions of the films.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The Return of the King earned $377,027,325 in the United States and Canada and $763,654,686 in other countries for a worldwide total of $1,147,633,833. In the weekend of February 20–22 of 2004, the film crossed the $1 billion mark, making it the second film in history to do so, after Titanic in 1998. Worldwide, it is the 27th highest-grossing film of all time when not adjusted for inflation, the highest-grossing film of 2003, the second highest-grossing film of the 2000s, the highest-grossing entry in The Lord of the Rings trilogy, and the highest-grossing film ever to be released by New Line Cinema. It held the record as Time Warner's highest-grossing film worldwide for eight years until it was surpassed by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 in 2011. Box Office Mojo estimates that the film had sold over 61 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.In the US and Canada, it is the 27th highest-grossing film, the highest-grossing 2003 film, and the highest-grossing entry in The Lord of the Rings trilogy. The film set an opening Wednesday record with $34,450,834. This record was first surpassed by Spider-Man 2 in 2004 and ranks as the seventh largest Wednesday opening. Additionally, it was ranked as the highest December opening day, holding that record for less than a decade before getting dethroned by The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey in 2012. The film opened a day earlier for a midnight showing and accounted for about $8 million. This was nearly twice the first-day total of The Fellowship of the Ring — which earned $18.2 million on its opening day in 2001 — as well as a significant increase over The Two Towers — which earned $26.1 million on its debut in 2002. Part of the grosses came from the Trilogy Tuesday event, in which the Extended Editions of the two previous films were played on 16 December before the first midnight screening. For two years, The Return of the King would hold the record for having the highest midnight screenings gross until 2005 when it was given to Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith. The film went on to make an opening weekend of $72,629,713, making it the second-highest opening weekend for a New Line Cinema film, behind Austin Powers in Goldmember. In addition, it had the third largest opening weekend of that year, after The Matrix Reloaded and X2. With a total gross of $125.1 million, the film had the biggest five-day Wednesday opening of all time, surpassing the previous record held by Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace. The next year, this record would be beaten by Shrek 2. Its Friday-Sunday opening weekend was a record-high for December (first surpassed by I Am Legend). The film also set single-day records for Christmas Day and New Year's Day (both first surpassed by Meet the Fockers).Outside the US and Canada, it is the 17th highest-grossing film, the highest-grossing 2003 film and the highest-grossing film of the series. On its first day (Wednesday, 17 December 2003), the film earned $23.5 million from 19 countries and it set an opening-weekend record outside the US and Canada with $125.9 million during the five-day weekend as a whole. The combined total gross increased to $250.1 million, making it the highest worldwide opening weekend at the time, knocking out The Matrix Revolutions. It set opening-day records in thirteen of them, including the United Kingdom, Germany, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands, Spain, Greece, Switzerland, Scandinavia (as well as separately in Sweden, Finland, Norway and Denmark), Mexico, Chile and Puerto Rico. It set opening-weekend records in the United Kingdom ($26.5 million in five days), Germany, Spain, Sweden, Denmark and Switzerland. In Singapore, it surpassed Finding Nemo to become the country's top-grossing film. In New Zealand, where filming took place, the film set opening day, opening weekend, single-day, Friday gross, Saturday gross and Sunday gross records with $1.7 million in four days.The substantial increase in initial box office totals caused optimistic studio executives to forecast that The Return of the King would surpass The Two Towers in total earnings. If this proved to be true, then this would be the first blockbuster trilogy for each successive film to earn more at the box office than its predecessor, when all three films were blockbuster successes. The Return of the King has helped The Lord of the Rings franchise to become the highest-grossing motion picture trilogy worldwide of all time with over $2.9 billion beating other notable series such as the original Star Wars Trilogy, and became New Line's highest grossing release.Through re-releases in 2005, 2011, 2017, 2020 and 2021, the film has grossed an additional $818,580 in the United States and Canada, and $4,530,321 overseas for a combined total of $5,348,901. This brings overall earnings to $377,845,905 domestic and $768,185,005 international for a worldwide total of $1,146,030,912.These figures do not include income from DVD sales, TV rights, etc. It has been estimated that the gross income from non-box office sales and merchandise has been at least equal to the box office for all three films. If this is so, the total gross income for the trilogy would be in the region of $6 billion following an investment of $300 million ($426 million including marketing costs).


=== Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, The Return of the King holds an approval rating of 94% based on 277 reviews, with an average rating of 8.70/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "Visually breathtaking and emotionally powerful, The Lord of the Rings - The Return of the King is a moving and satisfying conclusion to a great trilogy." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, gives the film a score of 94 out of 100 based on 41 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare average grade of "A+" on an A+ to F scale, the highest grade in the trilogy.
Like its two predecessors, The Return of the King was released to universal critical acclaim. Alan Morrison of Empire gave the film a perfect score of five stars. In his review, he called the film "the resounding climax to a landmark in cinema history" and praised how Peter Jackson had "kept the momentum of the series rolling on and on through the traditionally 'difficult' middle part and 'weak' finale, delivering a climax to the story that's neater and more affecting than what Tolkien managed on the printed page." Morrison also mentioned how fans of the films "who have walked beside these heroes every step of the way on such a long journey deserve the emotional pay-off as well as the action peaks, and they will be genuinely touched as the final credits roll." Elvis Mitchell for The New York Times lauded the acting, the craft of the technical crew, and Jackson's direction, describing The Return of the King as "a meticulous and prodigious vision made by a director who was not hamstrung by heavy use of computer special-effects imagery." Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three and a half stars out of four, saying that it is "such a crowning achievement, such a visionary use of all the tools of special effects, such a pure spectacle, that it can be enjoyed even by those who have not seen the first two films." Talking about the whole trilogy, Ebert said that he admired it "more as a whole than in its parts", and that The Return of the King certified The Lord of the Rings as "a work of bold ambition in a time of cinematic timidity". In his review for The Times, James Christopher praised The Return of the King as "everything a Ring fan could possibly wish for, and much more", and described The Lord of the Rings as "the greatest film trilogy ever mounted, with some of the most amazing action sequences committed to celluloid". Nev Pierce for the BBC gave the film five stars out of five, judging it to be the best chapter of the trilogy, since it combined "the 'ooh' factor of Fellowship with the zippy action of Towers". Pierce described The Return of the King as "Majestic, moving, and immense", and "an astonishing piece of storytelling". Philip French, reviewing it for The Observer, lauded the narrative force, the battle scenes, the language, and the visual style of the film, which he related to "the swirling battle paintings of Albrecht Altdorfer" and "Claude Lorraine's elegiac paintings of maritime departures inspired by classical poets." French wrote about the whole trilogy "Jackson's Lord of the Rings is indeed a very fine achievement, moving, involving and, to many people, even inspiring. It redeems the debased cinematic notion of the epic."In her review for Entertainment Weekly, Lisa Schwarzbaum gave the film an A grade, and wrote "The conclusion of Peter Jackson's masterwork is passionate and literate, detailed and expansive, and it's conceived with a risk-taking flair for old-fashioned movie magic at its most precious ... as he has done throughout, the director paces scenes of action, intimacy, and even panoramic, geographical grandeur ... with the control of a superb choreographer.". Schwarzbaum also said of the whole series "I can't think of another film trilogy that ends in such glory, or another monumental work of sustained storytelling that surges ahead with so much inventiveness and ardor." Richard Corliss of Time named The Return of the King the best film of the year and described the whole trilogy as "The film event of the millennium". Joe Morgenstern, for The Wall Street Journal, wrote "Never has a filmmaker aimed higher, or achieved more. The third and last installment of the screen epic based on J.R.R. Tolkien's literary classic redefines -- steeply upward -- the very notion of a major motion picture." Peter Bradshaw, who had been less enthusiastic about the first two chapters of the trilogy, gave The Return of the King four stars out of five in his review for The Guardian, commenting "I started the series an atheist and finished an agnostic". Bradshaw wrote of the film "Technically it really is superb", and commented "Hours after watching the film, I can close my eyes and see those incredible battle scenes pulsing and throbbing in my skull ... Maybe Kurosawa's battles will one day be described as proto-Jacksonian".The most common criticism of The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King was its running time, particularly the epilogue; even rave reviews for the film commented on its length. Joel Siegel of Good Morning America said in his review for the film (which he gave an 'A'): "If it didn't take forty-five minutes to end, it'd be my best picture of the year. As it is, it's just one of the great achievements in film history."In February 2004, a few months following release, the film was voted eighth on Empire's 100 Greatest Movies of All Time, compiled from readers' top ten lists. This forced the magazine to abandon its policy of only allowing films being older than a year to be eligible. In 2007, Total Film named The Return of the King the third best film of the past decade (Total Film's publication time), behind The Matrix and Fight Club.


=== Accolades ===

The film was nominated for eleven Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Director, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Original Score, Best Original Song, Best Visual Effects, Best Art Direction, Best Costume Design, Best Make-up, Best Sound Mixing and Best Film Editing. At the 76th Academy Awards in 2004, the film won all the categories for which it was nominated and it shares the record for highest Academy Award totals along with Titanic (which also starred Bernard Hill) and Ben-Hur, and also holding the record for the highest clean sweep at the Oscars, surpassing the nine awards earned by both Gigi and The Last Emperor. It was the first fantasy film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture. It also was the last movie for 14 years to win the Academy Award for Best Picture without being chosen as one of the top ten films of the year by the National Board of Review, until the release of The Shape of Water in 2017.
The film also won four Golden Globes (including Best Picture for Drama and Best Director), five BAFTAs, two MTV Movie Awards, two Grammy Awards, nine Saturn Awards, the New York Film Critics Circle award for Best Picture, the Nebula Award for Best Script, and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form.


== See also ==
The Hobbit (film series)
The Hobbit (1977 film)
The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)
The Return of the King (1980 film)
List of films considered the best
List of Academy Award records


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at IMDb 
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at AllMovie 
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at the TCM Movie Database
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at Box Office Mojo 
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at Metacritic 
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at Rotten Tomatoes12 Years a Slave (film)
1917 (2019 film)
2000X
2000s in film
2003 in film
30th Saturn Awards
47th Grammy Awards
57th British Academy Film Awards
61st Golden Globe Awards
76th Academy Awards
ABC News
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Elbereth Gilthoniel
A Few Good Men
A History of Violence
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Map of Middle-earth
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Star Is Born (2018 film)
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
A Walking Song
Abbie Cornish
Abigail Breslin
Academy Award
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Original Song
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Academy Awards
Adaptation (film)
Adaptations of The Lord of the Rings
Addiction to power in The Lord of the Rings
Adventure film
Adventures in Middle-earth
Ahna O'Reilly
Akira Kurosawa
Al Pacino
Aladdin (1992 Disney film)
Alan Arkin
Alan Bates
Alan Lee (illustrator)
Albert Finney
Albrecht Altdorfer
Aldis Hodge
Aleksa Palladino
Alessandro Nivola
Alex Funke
Alex Sharp
Alfonso Cuarón
Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore
Alice in Wonderland (2010 film)
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Allison Janney
Almost Famous
Amadeus (film)
Amarcord
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Fiction (film)
American Hustle
American Sniper
Amy Adams
Amy Irving
Amy Ryan
Amélie
An American in Paris (film)
Ancestry as guide to character in Tolkien's legendarium
Andrea Riseborough
Andrew Lesnie
Andrew Stanton
André Holland
Andy Serkis
Andúril
Angela Bassett
Angela Lansbury
Anil Kapoor
Anna Paquin
Anne of the Thousand Days
Annette Bening
Annie Collins
Annie Hall
Annie Lennox
Anthony Andrews
Antony Sher
Anupam Kher
Apollo 13 (film)
Arachnophobia
Aragorn
Architecture in Middle-earth
Argo (2012 film)
Arnor (Middle-earth)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arrival (film)
Arwen
Ashton Sanders
Ashutosh Lobo Gajiwala
Athelas
Atonement (2007 film)
August Diehl
Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery
Austin Powers in Goldmember
Avatar (2009 film)
Avengers: Endgame
Ayush Mahesh Khedekar
Azharuddin Mohammed Ismail
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role
BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
BAFTA Award for Best Cinematography
BAFTA Award for Best Costume Design
BAFTA Award for Best Direction
BAFTA Award for Best Editing
BAFTA Award for Best Film
BAFTA Award for Best Makeup and Hair
BAFTA Award for Best Original Music
BAFTA Award for Best Production Design
BAFTA Award for Best Sound
BAFTA Award for Best Special Visual Effects
BBC
Babe (film)
Babel (film)
Babylon 5
Back-to-back film production
Back to the Future
Bad Boys for Life
Bad Taste
Bag End
Balin (Middle-earth)
Ballad of a Soldier
Balrog
Barbara Remington
Barrie M. Osborne
Barrow-wight
Batman (1989 film)
Batman Begins
Battle of Helm's Deep
Battle of the Hornburg
Battle of the Morannon
Battle of the Pelennor Fields
Beasts of the Southern Wild
Beauty and the Beast (2017 film)
Becket (1964 film)
Being John Malkovich
Belfast (film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Ben Affleck
Ben Shenkman
Ben Stiller
Benh Zeitlin
Benicio del Toro
Benjamin Bratt
Beorn
Beowulf and Middle-earth
Beren and Lúthien
Bernard Hill
Beverly Hills Cop
Bicycle Thieves
Bilbo's Last Song
Bilbo Baggins
Bill Paxton
Billy Boyd (actor)
Billy Crudup
Birdman (film)
Black Panther (film)
Blade Runner
Blu-ray
Bob Balaban
Bobby Cannavale
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Bored of the Rings
Born of Hope
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Boromir
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Brad Dourif
Brad Pitt
Bradley Cooper
Braindead (film)
Braveheart
Bree, Middle-earth
Brendan Fraser
Brendan McCarthy
Brian Sibley
Brian d'Arcy James
British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Board of Film Classification
Broadcast News (film)
Brokeback Mountain
Bruce Jones (actor)
Bruce Spence
Bryan Cranston
Bryce Dallas Howard
Bugsy
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
C. J. Wilson (actor)
CODA (2021 film)
Cabaret (1972 film)
Caitlin FitzGerald
Caitríona Balfe
Caleb Landry Jones
Cameo appearance
Camera coverage
Cameron Duncan
Carol (film)
Casablanca (film)
Casino Royale (2006 film)
Cast of The Lord of the Rings film trilogy
Cate Blanchett
Catherine Zeta-Jones
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Celeborn
Chadwick Boseman
Character pairing in The Lord of the Rings
Chariots of Fire
Charles Dance
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (film)
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Chicago Sun-Times
Chinatown (1974 film)
Cho Yeo-jeong
Choi Woo-shik
Chris Cooper
Chris Lowell
Chris Messina
Chris Tucker
Christian Bale
Christian Rivers
Christianity in Middle-earth
Christine Baranski
Christoph Waltz
Christopher Boyes
Christopher Denham
Christopher Lee
Christopher Nolan
Chroma key
Ciarán Hinds
Cicely Tyson
Cimarron (1931 film)
Cinderella (2015 American film)
CinemaScore
Citizen Kane
Clarke Peters
Claude Lorraine
Clea DuVall
Clifton Collins Jr.
Clive Owen
Closer (film)
Colin Firth
Colin Morgan
Colm Feore
Computer-generated imagery
Concerning Hobbits
Copenhagen
Craig Parker
Crash (2004 film)
Crazy Rich Asians (film)
Cries and Whispers
Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Acting Ensemble
Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Picture
Crossing the Line (2008 film)
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon
D. W. Moffett
DTS (sound system)
DVD
DVD9
Da 5 Bloods
Dallas Roberts
Dallas–Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Damian Young
Dan Futterman
Dan Hennah
Danai Gurira
Dances with Wolves
Daniel Brühl
Daniel Craig
Daniel Durant
Daniel Flaherty
Daniel Kaluuya
Daniels (directors)
Darling (1965 film)
Dave Bautista
David Wenham
Day for Night (film)
Dead Poets Society
Death and immortality in Middle-earth
Decline and fall in Middle-earth
Deidre Goodwin
Denethor
Denis Ménochet
Denis Villeneuve
Denise Faye
Dennis Quaid
Der Herr der Ringe
Derek Jacobi
Dev Patel
Diameter
Diane Kruger
Dianne Wiest
District 9
Do the Right Thing
Doc Savage: The Man of Bronze
Doctor Who
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Dol Guldur
Domenick Lombardozzi
Dominic Monaghan
Dominic West
Don Cheadle
Doubt (2008 film)
Dr. Strangelove
Dragonheart
Drive My Car (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
Drúedain
Dune (2021 film)
Dunkirk (2017 film)
Dwarf (Middle-earth)
Dwarves in Middle-earth
Déagol
Dúnedain
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
Eagle (Middle-earth)
Eagles in Middle-earth
East of Eden (film)
Easter egg (media)
Easterling (Middle-earth)
Economy of Middle-earth
Ed Harris
Eddie Redmayne
Educating Rita (film)
Edward Norton
Edward Scissorhands
Eileen Atkins
Ekaterina Shchelkanova
Elendil
Elendor
Elf (Middle-earth)
Eli Roth
Elijah Wood
Elisabeth Röhm
Elrond
Elves in Middle-earth
Elvis Mitchell
Embassy Theatre, Wellington
Emilia Jones
Emily Watson
Emily Woof
Emma Stone
Empire (film magazine)
Empire (magazine)
Empire Award for Best Film
Enchanted (film)
England in Middle-earth
Ensemble cast
Ent
Entertainment Weekly
Environmentalism in The Lord of the Rings
Epic film
Eric Heisserer
Erika Christensen
Errantry
Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind
Ethan Hawke
Ethan Van der Ryn
Eugenio Derbez
Eurythmics
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Fandango Media
Fantasy film
Far from Heaven
Faramir
Fargo (1996 film)
Fastitocalon (poem)
Fellowship!
Ferdia Walsh-Peelo
Field of Cormallen
Fight Club
Figwit
Finding Nemo
First Cow
Five Easy Pieces
Florence Baptistery
Florida Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
Forbidden Games
Forced perspective
Forest Whitaker
Forests in Middle-earth
Forgotten Silver
Forrest Gump
Four Weddings and a Funeral
Fran Walsh
Frances McDormand
Frank Langella
Freida Pinto
Frequency (2000 film)
Frodo Baggins
From Here to Eternity
Fury (2014 film)
Galadriel
Galaxy Quest
Game of Thrones
Game of Thrones (season 1)
Gandalf
Gandhi (film)
Garret Dillahunt
Gary Basaraba
Gary Russell
Gary Sinise
Gene Hackman
Gene Wilder
Gentleman's Agreement
Geoffrey Rush
Geography of Middle-earth
George Lucas
George Miller (filmmaker)
Geraldine Somerville
Gervaise (film)
Get Out
Ghost (1990 film)
Ghostbusters
Gigi (1958 film)
Gimli (Middle-earth)
Gladiator (2000 film)
Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery
Glen Powell
Glorfindel
Going My Way
Goldberry
Golden Globe Award
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song
Gollum
Gondor
Gondor: The Siege of Minas Tirith
Gone with the Wind (film)
Good Morning America
Good Omens (TV series)
Goodfellas
Gosford Park
Grammy Award
Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Grant Major
Gravity (2013 film)
Grease (film)
Green Book (film)
Greg Kinnear
Gríma Wormtongue
Guardians of Middle-earth
Guardians of the Galaxy (film)
Guillermo del Toro
Guy Pearce
Gwyneth Paltrow
Hairspray (2007 film)
Half-elf
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hammond Peek
Hank Azaria
Hannah and Her Sisters
Happiness (1998 film)
Harad
Haradrim
Harlan Ellison
HarperCollins
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (film)
Harry Shum Jr.
Harvey Keitel
Hayao Miyazaki
Headbutt
Heaven Can Wait (1978 film)
Heavenly Creatures
Helen Mirren
Helena Bonham Carter
Helm's Deep
Her (film)
Heraldry of Middle-earth
Heroism in The Lord of the Rings
Hidden Figures
High Noon
Hobbit
Hobitit
Home Alone
Hoop Dreams
Hordes of the Things (radio series)
How Green Was My Valley (film)
How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000 film)
Howard Shore
Howards End (film)
Howl's Moving Castle (film)
Hugh Grant
Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation
Hugo Speer
Hugo Weaving
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
I Am Legend (film)
I See Fire
Ian Holm
Ian McKellen
Imelda Staunton
Impression of depth in The Lord of the Rings
In Bruges
In Dreams (Howard Shore song)
In Which We Serve
In the Heat of the Night (film)
Inception
Independence Day (1996 film)
Inglourious Basterds
Interlacing in The Lord of the Rings
Interstellar (film)
Into the West (song)
Irish Film and Television Award for Best International Film
Irrfan Khan
Isengard
It's Complicated (film)
It Happened One Night
J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. II: The Two Towers
J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I (1990 video game)
J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I (1994 video game)
J. C. MacKenzie
J. M. W. Turner
J. Michael Straczynski
J. R. R. Tolkien
J. R. R. Tolkien's Riders of Rohan
J. R. R. Tolkien's influences
JFK (film)
JSTOR (identifier)
Jac Schaeffer
Jack Brown Genius
Jack Huston
Jack McGee (actor)
Jacki Weaver
Jackie Hoffman
Jacky Ido
Jacob Vargas
James Brolin
James Cameron
James Galway
James Gunn
James Hong
James Schamus
James Wilby
Jamie Dornan
Jamie Lee Curtis
Jamie Selkirk
Janelle Monáe
Jang Hye-jin (actress)
Javier Bardem
Jean de Florette
Jennifer Ehle
Jennifer Esposito
Jennifer Lawrence
Jenny Slate
Jeremy Northam
Jeremy Renner
Jeremy Strong
Jesse Plemons
Jessica Chastain
Jessica Henwick
Jim Carter (actor)
Jim Parsons
Jim Reardon
Jim Rygiel
Joe Alwyn
Joe Letteri
Joe Morgenstern
Joe Pesci
Joel Siegel
John C. Reilly
John Carroll Lynch
John Doman
John Goodman
John Hawkes (actor)
John Howe (illustrator)
John Noble
John Rhys-Davies
John Slattery
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Jonás Cuarón
Jordan Peele
Joseph Fiennes
Joseph Gordon-Levitt
Josh Brolin
Joss Whedon
Jude Hill
Judi Dench
Julia (1977 film)
Julia Stiles
Julie Dreyfus
Jung Hyeon-jun
Jung Ji-so
Jurassic Park (film)
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
Karl Urban
Kate Hudson
Kathleen Quinlan
Kathrine Narducci
Kathryn Hahn
Ke Huy Quan
Kelly Macdonald
Kelvin Harrison Jr.
Kerry Bishé
Kevin Bacon
Kevin Costner
Kevin Spacey
Khraniteli
Killers of the Flower Moon (film)
King Kong (2005 film)
Kiribati
Kirsten Dunst
Knives Out
Kramer vs. Kramer
Kristin Scott Thomas
Kyle Chandler
L.A. Confidential (film)
La La Land
La Ronde (1950 film)
Lacombe, Lucien
Lady Bird (film)
Ladyhawke (film)
Languages constructed by J. R. R. Tolkien
Larenz Tate
Last Orders (film)
Lava
Lawrence Makoare
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leaving Las Vegas
Led Zeppelin
Lee Jung-eun (actress)
Lee Sun-kyun
Lego The Hobbit (video game)
Lego The Lord of the Rings
Lego The Lord of the Rings (video game)
Legolas
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Lesley Sharp
Leslie Odom Jr.
Letitia Wright
Liev Schreiber
Life of Pi (film)
Lincoln (film)
Lisa Schwarzbaum
List of 1977 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1978 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1979 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1980 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1981 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1982 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1983 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1984 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1985 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1986 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1987 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1988 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1989 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1990 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1991 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1992 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1993 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1994 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1995 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1996 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1997 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1998 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1999 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2000 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2001 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2002 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2003 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2004 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2005 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2006 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2007 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2008 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2009 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2010 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2011 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2012 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2013 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2014 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2015 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2016 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2017 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2018 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2019 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2020 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2021 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2022 box office number-one films in the United States
List of Academy Award records
List of Middle-earth plants
List of Middle-earth weapons and armour
List of accolades received by The Hobbit film series
List of accolades received by The Lord of the Rings film series
List of films considered the best
List of highest-grossing films
List of highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada
List of highest-grossing films in the United States by year
List of minor places in Middle-earth
List of original characters in The Hobbit film series
List of original characters in The Lord of the Rings film series
List of weapons and armour in Middle-earth
Literary devices in The Lord of the Rings
Literary reception of The Lord of the Rings
Little Miss Sunshine
Little Shop of Horrors (1986 film)
Liv Tyler
London Oratory School Schola
London Philharmonic Orchestra
London Voices
Lonely Mountain
Lord of the Rings: Game One
Lord of the Rings (board game)
Lord of the Rings (musical)
Lothlórien
Louis C.K.
Love Story (1970 film)
Lucas Hedges
Luck and fate in Middle-earth
Lucy Alibar
Lucy Liu
Ludacris
Luis Guzmán
Lupita Nyong'o
M. Night Shyamalan
MASSIVE (software)
MTV Movie Award for Movie of the Year
MTV Movie Awards
Mad Max: Fury Road
Madelyn Cline
Madhur Mittal
Maggie Smith
Magic in Middle-earth
Magnolia (film)
Mahershala Ali
Maiar in Middle-earth
Malcolm X (1992 film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Margrethe II of Denmark
Marin Ireland
Mark Addy
Mark Ruffalo
Mark Rylance
Mark Wahlberg
Marlee Matlin
Martin Clunes
Martin Freeman
Martin Wuttke
Marton Csokas
Marty (film)
Mary Steenburgen
Matamata
Matt Dillon
Max Adler (actor)
May It Be
Mediterranean Basin
Meet the Feebles
Meet the Fockers
Mel Brooks
Melissa Leo
Memento (film)
Men in Black (1997 film)
Men in Middle-earth
Mena Suvari
Menace II Society
Mental illness in Middle-earth
Meriadoc Brandybuck
Merry Brandybuck
Metacritic
Metropolis (1927 film)
Michael B. Jordan
Michael D. C. Drout
Michael Douglas
Michael Fassbender
Michael Gambon
Michael Hedges (sound engineer)
Michael Keaton
Michael Peña
Michael Schur
Michael Semanick
Michelle Yeoh
Middle-earth
Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor
Middle-earth: Shadow of War
Middle-earth Collectible Card Game
Middle-earth Enterprises
Middle-earth Role Playing
Middle-earth Strategy Battle Game
Middle-earth artists
Middle-earth in film
Middle-earth in motion pictures
Middle-earth in video games
Middle-earth peoples
Middle Earth (board game)
Midnight Cowboy
Midnight Express (film)
Miguel Ferrer
Mike Hopkins (sound editor)
Mike Myers
Mike Vogel
Milk (2008 American film)
Million Dollar Baby
Minas Tirith
Minor places in Middle-earth
Miramax Films
Miranda Otto
Mirkwood
Mississippi Burning
Misty Mountain Hop
Misty Mountains
Mithril
Moon (2009 film)
Moonlight (2016 film)
Mordor
Moria, Middle-earth
Moria (Middle-earth)
Mortal Engines (film)
Moulin Rouge!
Mount Doom
Mount Ruapehu
Mouth of Sauron
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mrs. Miniver
Mrs Henderson Presents
Muddle Earth
Mulholland Drive (film)
Munich (2005 film)
Music Inspired by Lord of the Rings (Bo Hansson album)
Music of Middle-earth
Music of The Hobbit film series
Music of The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power
Music of The Lord of the Rings film series
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Left Foot
Mya (singer)
Mélanie Laurent
Naming of weapons in Middle-earth
Namárië
Naomi Watts
Naomie Harris
Napoleon Dynamite
Narrative structure of The Lord of the Rings
Narsil
Nashville (film)
Natasha Lyonne
Nathan Lane
National Board of Review
National Board of Review Award for Best Cast
Nazgûl
Nebula Award for Best Script
Neil Gaiman
Neill Blomkamp
New Line Cinema
New York Film Critics Circle
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
New Zealand
Next Limit Technologies
Ngila Dickson
Nicholas Birns
Nicholas Hoult
Nicholas Nickleby (2002 film)
Nico Lathouris
Nicole Perlman
Night of the Living Dead
Nightbreed
No Country for Old Men
Noah Robbins
Noah Segan
Nomadland
Non-narrative elements in The Lord of the Rings
Northern courage in Middle-earth
Númenor
Octavia Spencer
Oh, God! (film)
Old Forest
Old Man Willow
Oliphaunt
Olive
Oliver! (film)
Olivia Colman
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Waterfront
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
One Ring
Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Picture
Orc
Orc (Middle-earth)
Ordinary People
Orlando Bloom
Out of Africa (film)
Oxonmoot
Paganism in Middle-earth
Palantír
Palatine Chapel, Aachen
Pan's Labyrinth
Parasite (2019 film)
Park Myung-hoon
Park Road Post
Park So-dam
Paths of the Dead
Patton (film)
Paul Barber (actor)
Paul Dano
Paul Giamatti
Paul Herman
Pauline Baynes
Peregrin Took
Pete Docter
Peter Bradshaw
Peter Dinklage
Peter Gallagher
Peter Jackson
Peter Jackson's interpretation of The Lord of the Rings
Peter King (make-up artist)
Peter Owen
Peter Riegert
Petra
Phantasm (film)
Phil Lord and Christopher Miller
Philip French
Philippa Boyens
Philology and Middle-earth
Philomena (film)
Pick-up (filmmaking)
Picturing Tolkien
Pippin Took
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
Plants in Middle-earth
Platoon (film)
Poetry in The Lord of the Rings
Porrhothele antipodiana
Portrait of a Lady on Fire
Post-production
Prisoners (2013 film)
Prizzi's Honor
Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture
Production of The Lord of the Rings film series
Proverbs in The Lord of the Rings
Prêt-à-Porter (film)
Psychological journeys of Middle-earth
Psychological trauma
Pulp Fiction
Putangirua Pinnacles
Pyre
Queen Latifah
Queenstown, New Zealand
Quenya
Quests in Middle-earth
Quiz Show (film)
Rachel McAdams
Rachel Weisz
Radagast
Raiders of the Lost Ark
Rain Man
Ramble On
Randall William Cook
Rangipo Desert
Ray Bradbury Award
Ray Romano
RealFlow
Rebecca (1940 film)
Recordings of the music for The Lord of the Rings film series
Red Arrow (Middle-earth)
Red Book of Westmarch
Reds (film)
Renée Fleming
Renée Zellweger
Requiem for a Tower
Return of the Jedi
Review aggregator
Richard Clark (director)
Richard Corliss
Richard E. Grant
Richard Gere
Richard III (1955 film)
Richard Taylor (filmmaker)
Rick Porras
Rings of Power
Risk: The Lord of the Rings Trilogy Edition
Rivendell
Road to Perdition
Robert Carlyle
Robert De Niro
Robert Gordon (screenwriter)
Robin Williams
Rocky
Rod Taylor
Rodney Rothman
RogerEbert.com
Roger Ebert
Rogue One
Rohan, Middle-earth
Rohan (Middle-earth)
Roma (2018 film)
Room at the Top (1959 film)
Rory Cochrane
Rotten Tomatoes
Routledge
Royd Tolkien
Rubina Ali
Ryan Phillippe
Sacha Baron Cohen
Sagan om ringen (1971 film)
Sam Rockwell
Samara Weaving
Samwise Gamgee
Sandra Bullock
Sandra Oh
Sarah McLeod
Saruman
Saturn Award
Saturn Award for Best Actor
Saturn Award for Best Costume Design
Saturn Award for Best DVD or Blu-ray Special Edition Release
Saturn Award for Best Director
Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film
Saturn Award for Best Make-up
Saturn Award for Best Music
Saturn Award for Best Special Effects
Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor
Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress
Saturn Award for Best Writing
Sauron
Sauron (game)
Saving Private Ryan
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Scoot McNairy
Scream (1996 film)
Scream VI
Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture
Sean Astin
Sean Bean
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Serena Williams
Serenity (2005 film)
Seven (1995 film)
Sexuality in The Lord of the Rings
Shadows of Mordor
Shakespeare's influence on Tolkien
Shakespeare in Love
Shea Whigham
Shelob
Shire (Middle-earth)
Shrek
Shrek 2
Sideways
Siena
Silver Linings Playbook
Simon Callow
Sin City (film)
Sindarin
Sissel Kyrkjebø
Sissy Spacek
Skyfall
Sleeper (1973 film)
Slumdog Millionaire
Something Wicked This Way Comes (film)
Somewhere in Time (film)
Song Kang-ho
Song of Eärendil
Sons and Lovers (film)
Sophie Thompson
Sound and language in Middle-earth
Soylent Green
Spartacus (film)
Special effects of The Lord of the Rings film series
Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse
Spider-Man: No Way Home
Spider-Man (2002 film)
Spider-Man 2
Spider-Man 3
Spotlight (film)
Stanley R. Greenberg
Stanley Tucci
Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith
Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace
Star Wars: The Force Awakens
Star Wars: The Last Jedi
Star Wars (film)
Star Wars original trilogy
Stardust (2007 film)
State and Main
Stephanie Hsu
Stephanie Kurtzuba
Stephen Fry
Stephen Graham
Stephen Sinclair
Stephen Sondheim
Sterling K. Brown
Steve Carell
Steve Huison
Steven Bauer
Stewards of Gondor
Sunday Bloody Sunday (film)
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Superman II: The Richard Donner Cut
Superman Returns
Susan Misner
Sycophant
Sylvester Groth
Symphony No. 1 "The Lord of the Rings"
Tanay Chheda
Tanvi Ganesh Lonkar
Taraji P. Henson
Tasmanian devil
Tate Donovan
Tauriel
Taye Diggs
Ted Nasmith
Terminator 2: Judgment Day
Terms of Endearment
Terrence Howard
Terri Tatchell
Tess Harper
Thandiwe Newton
The Accidental Tourist (film)
The Adventures of Tintin (film)
The Adventures of Tom Bombadil
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Avengers (2012 film)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Banshees of Inisherin
The Battle of Evermore
The Beatles: Get Back
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Big Short (film)
The Birdcage
The Bourne Supremacy (film)
The Bourne Ultimatum (film)
The Boy Who Could Fly
The Boy and the Heron
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Cardinal
The Children of Húrin
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Commitments (film)
The Council of Elrond
The Crying Game
The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (film)
The Dark Crystal
The Dark Knight
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Departed
The Descendants
The Doctor's Wife
The Elephant Man (film)
The Empire Strikes Back
The English Patient (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The Fall of Gondolin
The Fault in Our Stars (film)
The Favourite
The Fellowship of the Ring
The Fighter
The First Wives Club
The French Connection (film)
The Frighteners
The Full Monty
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Golden Voyage of Sinbad
The Good Place
The Graduate
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great War and Middle-earth
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guardian
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Harder They Fall (2021 film)
The Help (film)
The History of Middle-earth
The History of The Hobbit
The Hobbit
The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey
The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies
The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug
The Hobbit (1967 film)
The Hobbit (1977 film)
The Hobbit (1985 film)
The Hobbit (film series)
The Holdovers
The Holes
The Hollywood Reporter
The Hours (film)
The Hunger Games: Catching Fire
The Hunt for Gollum
The Hurt Locker
The Hustler
The Incredibles
The Informer (1935 film)
The Irishman
The Iron Claw (film)
The J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia
The Jungle Book (2016 film)
The Killing Fields (film)
The King's Speech
The Last Emperor
The Last Ringbearer
The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Lives of Others
The Lobster
The Long and Short of It
The Lord of the Rings
The Lord of the Rings: Aragorn's Quest
The Lord of the Rings: Conquest
The Lord of the Rings: Gollum
The Lord of the Rings: Journey to Rivendell
The Lord of the Rings: Return to Moria
The Lord of the Rings: Tactics
The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth
The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II
The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-king
The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (soundtrack)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (video game)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (soundtrack)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (video game)
The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power
The Lord of the Rings: The Third Age
The Lord of the Rings: The Third Age (Game Boy Advance)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (soundtrack)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (video game)
The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim
The Lord of the Rings: War in the North
The Lord of the Rings: War of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings (1955 radio series)
The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)
The Lord of the Rings (1979 radio series)
The Lord of the Rings (1981 radio series)
The Lord of the Rings (film series)
The Lord of the Rings Motion Picture Trilogy: The Exhibition
The Lord of the Rings Online
The Lord of the Rings Online: Before the Shadow
The Lord of the Rings Online: Fate of Gundabad
The Lord of the Rings Online: Helm's Deep
The Lord of the Rings Online: Minas Morgul
The Lord of the Rings Online: Mines of Moria
The Lord of the Rings Online: Mordor
The Lord of the Rings Online: Riders of Rohan
The Lord of the Rings Online: Rise of Isengard
The Lord of the Rings Online: Siege of Mirkwood
The Lord of the Rings Online: War of Three Peaks
The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game
The Lord of the Rings Strategy Battle Game
The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Lovely Bones (film)
The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late
The Martian (film)
The Matrix
The Matrix Reloaded
The Matrix Revolutions
The Mist (film)
The Muppet Movie
The Nature of Middle-earth
The New York Times
The Nightmare Before Christmas
The Observer
The Old Guard (2020 film)
The One Ring Roleplaying Game
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Player (1992 film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Princess Bride (film)
The Purple Rose of Cairo
The Queen (2006 film)
The Return of the King
The Return of the King (1980 film)
The Return of the King (disambiguation)
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Road Goes Ever On
The Road Goes Ever On (song)
The Robe (film)
The Scouring of the Shire
The Sea-Bell
The Shadow of the Past
The Shape of Water
The Shire
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Silmarillion
The Sixth Sense
The Social Network
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sound Barrier
The Sound of Music (film)
The Sting
The Sweet Hereafter (film)
The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen
The Times
The Town (2010 film)
The Treason of Isengard (1954 book)
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Tree of Life (film)
The Trial of the Chicago 7
The Truman Show
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1
The Twilight Saga: Eclipse
The Twilight Saga: New Moon
The Two Towers
The Usual Suspects
The Valley (1976 film)
The Wages of Fear
The Wall Street Journal
The Walt Disney Company
Themes of The Lord of the Rings
There's Something About Mary
They're Taking the Hobbits to Isengard
They Shall Not Grow Old
Thomas Haden Church
Thomas Robins (actor)
Thora Birch
Thranduil
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Three Men and a Baby
Théoden
Til Schweiger
Time (magazine)
Time Warner
Time in J. R. R. Tolkien's fiction
Timothy Spall
Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy (film)
Titanic (1997 film)
To All the Boys: Always and Forever
Tolkien's Middle-earth family trees
Tolkien's ambiguity
Tolkien's artwork
Tolkien's frame stories
Tolkien's impact on fantasy
Tolkien's maps
Tolkien's modern sources
Tolkien's monsters
Tolkien's moral dilemma
Tolkien's prose style
Tolkien and race
Tolkien and the Celtic
Tolkien and the Norse
Tolkien and the classical world
Tolkien and the medieval
Tolkien and the modernists
Tolkien fandom
Tolkien research
Tolkienmoot
Tom Bombadil
Tom Hanks
Tom Hollander
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tom Wilkinson
Tomas Milian
Tommy Lee Jones
Toni Collette
Top Gun
Top Gun: Maverick
Topher Grace
Topsy-Turvy
Total Film
Toy Story
Toy Story 3
Toy Story 4
Traffic (2000 film)
Transformers (film)
Translation of The Lord of the Rings into Swedish
Translations of The Lord of the Rings
Translations of The Lord of the Rings into Russian
Treebeard
Trees in Middle-earth
Trevante Rhodes
Trolls in Middle-earth
Troy Kotsur
Turner Classic Movies
Twilight (2008 film)
Twizel
Tár
Ultra HD Blu-ray
Undying Lands
Unfinished Tales
Unforgiven
United 93 (film)
United Press International
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Uruk-hai
VHS
Valley of the Stereos
Victor Garber
Viggo Mortensen
Vince Vaughn
Viola Davis
Virginia Madsen
WALL-E
WandaVision
Wang Hui-ling
War in Middle Earth
War of the Ring
War of the Ring (SPI game)
War of the Ring (board game)
Warg
Warner Bros.
Warning beacons of Gondor
Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association Award for Best Film
Watch on the Rhine
Watcher in the Water
Watchmen (film)
Wayback Machine
Wedding Crashers
Weighted average
Wellington
Wes Bentley
West Side Story (1961 film)
West of Memphis
Weta Workshop
Whenever You're Ready (The Good Place)
White Council
White Tree
White Tree of Gondor
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (film)
Who Framed Roger Rabbit
William Fichtner
WingNut Films
Wings (1927 film)
Winston Duke
Wisdom tooth
Witch-king of Angmar
Wizard (Middle-earth)
Wizards in Middle-earth
Women Talking (film)
Women in The Lord of the Rings
Wonder Woman (2017 film)
Woody Allen
Woody Harrelson
Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien
Wuthering Heights (1939 film)
Wētā FX
Wētā Workshop
X-Men: Days of Future Past
X2 (film)
Yahya Abdul-Mateen II
Yo-Yo Ma
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Young Frankenstein
Yuri Rasovsky
Z (1969 film)
Zach Galifianakis
Zero Dark Thirty
Éomer
Éowyn
Željko Ivanek
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/film/3324387.stm
http://www.perry-miniatures.com/index2.html
http://www.theonering.net/features/exclusives/oneyear_page03.html
http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/034/034276p1.html
http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/426/426327p1.html
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/film/3265475.stm
http://www.nzherald.co.nz/feature/story.cfm?c_id=594&ObjectID=10379594
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/film/3253708.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20070126130514/http://www.timewarner.com/corp/businesses/detail/new_line_cinema/index.html
http://www.time.com/time/bestandworst/2003/story.html
http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/76th-winners.html
http://today.msnbc.msn.com/id/4057351/ns/today-entertainment/
http://www.people.com/people/article/0,,627488,00.html
http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/The-Lord-of-the-Rings-The-Motion-Picture-Trilogy-Blu-ray/5174/
http://www.blu-ray.com/news/?id=4787
http://www.timewarner.com/corp/businesses/detail/new_line_cinema/index.html
http://nerdist.com/peter-jackson-filmed-part-of-return-of-the-king-on-a-mine-field/
https://web.archive.org/web/20110623165925/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/days/?page=wed&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20070304111536/http://www.bbc.co.uk/films/2003/12/09/peter_jackson_return_of_the_king_interview.shtml
https://web.archive.org/web/20060912120101/http://www.theonering.net/features/exclusives/oneyear_page03.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151022144559/http://nerdist.com/peter-jackson-filmed-part-of-return-of-the-king-on-a-mine-field/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160115175233/http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0167260/locations
https://web.archive.org/web/20110831202506/http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/034/034276p1.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20120118234017/http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/426/426327p1.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20060317114116/http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/film/3265475.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20090115065013/http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/film/3253708.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20100225150750/http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/The-Lord-of-the-Rings-The-Motion-Picture-Trilogy-Blu-ray/5174/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100626104403/http://www.blu-ray.com/news/?id=4787
https://web.archive.org/web/20110530090916/http://www.amazon.com/Lord-Rings-Picture-Trilogy-Extended/dp/B0026L7H20
https://web.archive.org/web/20121124120253/http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0167260/
https://web.archive.org/web/20090824224736/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2003&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140720052657/http://boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=lordoftherings.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20160304030615/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=returnoftheking.htm&adjust_yr=1&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20071001050235/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?yr=2003&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20120215035403/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=1284&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20110621192103/http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=returnoftheking.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20110302100817/http://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/weekends/month/?mo=12&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20120701224319/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/days/holidays.htm?page=xmas&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20100205134131/http://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/days/holidays.htm?page=newyrs&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20121029123034/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/intl/weekend/yearly/?yr=2003&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20120619042637/http://boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=1286&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20130603053641/http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/lord-of-the-rings-the-return-of-the-king-2003
https://web.archive.org/web/20071111183357/http://www.time.com/time/bestandworst/2003/story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20060313130326/http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/JoelSiegel/story?id=116553&page=1
https://web.archive.org/web/20110129233607/http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2004/01/25/entertainment/main595626.shtml
https://web.archive.org/web/20120925064231/http://today.msnbc.msn.com/id/4057351/ns/today-entertainment/
https://web.archive.org/web/20110309094432/http://www.people.com/people/article/0,,627488,00.html
https://www.amazon.com/Lord-Rings-Picture-Trilogy-Extended/dp/B0026L7H20
http://www.gardinerhoulgate.co.uk/lord-of-the-strings/
http://www.tolkiendil.com/_media/divertissements/adaptations/films/sda_3_livret_de_presentation_de_la_bo_en_anglais_.pdf
http://www.amagpiesnest.com/source_songs/index_source_songs.htm#choirs
http://www.filmmusicsociety.org/news_events/features/2014/121714.html
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v278981
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4770274-6
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0167260/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0167260/locations
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=returnoftheking.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_lord_of_the_rings_the_return_of_the_king
https://viaf.org/viaf/316752205
https://aleph.nkp.cz/F/?func=find-c&local_base=aut&ccl_term=ica=unn2006375059&CON_LNG=ENG
https://web.archive.org/web/20130615050856/http://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/29/movies/29BOFF.html?ex=1220932800&en=93d0c927a497bfec&ei=5070
https://web.archive.org/web/20121101065311/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/domestic.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20121030220609/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/?pagenum=1&sort=osgross&order=DESC&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20120929190645/http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/76th-winners.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20040605104640/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q131074#P856
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q131074#P345
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q131074#P1562
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q131074#P1237
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q131074#P1712
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q131074#P1258
https://www.warnerbros.com/movies/lord-rings-return-king/
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/the-lord-of-the-rings-the-return-of-the-king
https://web.archive.org/web/20070510095228/http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/film/3324387.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20071214191723/http://www.perry-miniatures.com/index2.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20070930012208/http://www.nzherald.co.nz/feature/story.cfm?c_id=594&ObjectID=10379594
https://web.archive.org/web/20170426062555/http://www.gardinerhoulgate.co.uk/lord-of-the-strings/
https://web.archive.org/web/20171002195136/http://www.amagpiesnest.com/source_songs/index_source_songs.htm#choirs
https://web.archive.org/web/20160313145656/http://filmmusicsociety.org/news_events/features/2014/121714.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170407054056/http://www.tolkiendil.com/_media/divertissements/adaptations/films/sda_3_livret_de_presentation_de_la_bo_en_anglais_.pdf
https://www.bbc.co.uk/films/2003/12/09/peter_jackson_return_of_the_king_interview.shtml
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0167260/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/54279
https://web.archive.org/web/20190512154705/https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/54279
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/
https://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/29/movies/29BOFF.html?ex=1220932800&en=93d0c927a497bfec&ei=5070
https://boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2003&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=lordoftherings.htm
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=returnoftheking.htm&adjust_yr=1&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/domestic.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?yr=2003&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=1284&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/days/?page=wed&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/weekends/month/?mo=12&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/days/holidays.htm?page=xmas&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/days/holidays.htm?page=newyrs&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/?pagenum=1&sort=osgross&order=DESC&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/intl/weekend/yearly/?yr=2003&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=1286&p=.htm
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/lord-of-the-rings-the-return-of-the-king-2003
http://www.craig-parker.net/articles/sfradio.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20060814132240/http://craig-parker.net/articles/sfradio.php
http://www.nzherald.co.nz/movies/news/article.cfm?c_id=200&objectid=232465
http://members.tripod.com/peter_jackson_online/lotr/articles/20_questions2.htm
https://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/JoelSiegel/story?id=116553&page=1
https://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2004/01/25/entertainment/main595626.shtml
https://web.archive.org/web/20200517125524/https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0167260/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200517125821/https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_lord_of_the_rings_the_return_of_the_king
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q131074#identifiers
https://www.filmstories.co.uk/news/lord-of-the-rings-and-the-hobbit-set-for-4k-release-in-december/
https://web.archive.org/web/20201021183914/https://www.filmstories.co.uk/news/lord-of-the-rings-and-the-hobbit-set-for-4k-release-in-december/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/harry-potter-deathly-hallows-part-220419
https://web.archive.org/web/20181220122629/https://www.cinemascore.com/publicsearch/index/title/
https://www.cinemascore.com/publicsearch/index/title/
https://screenrant.com/lord-rings-movies-records-box-office-awards/
https://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/lord-rings-return-king-film
https://web.archive.org/web/20180322120813/http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/lord-rings-return-king-film
https://www.cbr.com/lord-of-the-rings-return-of-the-king-saruman-fate-explained/
https://www.empireonline.com/movies/reviews/lord-rings-return-king-review/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/415204/the-lord-of-the-rings-the-return-of-the-king
https://www.bbc.co.uk/stoke/films/reviews/g_m/lotr_return_of_the_king.shtml
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/the-return-of-the-king-review-qg3nhdfkz9z
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB107179510887385500
https://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/16/movies/film-review-triumph-tinged-with-regret-in-middle-earth.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20071114002753/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1101031215-557084,00.html
http://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2003/dec/14/features.review17
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/dec/14/lordoftherings1
http://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/dec/13/artsfeatures.lordoftherings
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/dec/19/lordoftherings
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1101031215-557084,00.html
https://ew.com/article/2003/12/19/lord-rings-return-king-3/
https://www.screendaily.com/the-return-of-the-king-passes-1bn-at-the-box-office/4017470.article
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987009950843405171
https://www.upi.com/Archives/2003/12/22/Return-of-the-King-tops-box-office/4371072069200/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220227212707/https://www.upi.com/Archives/2003/12/22/Return-of-the-King-tops-box-office/4371072069200/
https://www.today.com/popculture/shrek-2-success-spawn-more-sequels-wbna5054265
https://www.screendaily.com/rings-reigns-as-top-singapore-film-of-2003/4016681.article
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=1824&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20141006073452/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=1824&p=.htm
https://boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=3586&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20121110153500/http://www.nzherald.co.nz/movies/news/article.cfm?c_id=200&objectid=232465
https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b875284b6
https://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/Oscars2005/lord-rings-wins-11-oscars/story?id=116560
https://web.archive.org/web/20140224002917/http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/Oscars2005/lord-rings-wins-11-oscars/story?id=116560
https://www.thefreelibrary.com/%22You+have+grown+very+much%22:+The+Scouring+of+the+Shire+and+the...-a0298173246
https://web.archive.org/web/20210410090534/https://www.thefreelibrary.com/%22You+have+grown+very+much%22:+The+Scouring+of+the+Shire+and+the...-a0298173246
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24353144
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0362-4331
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0140-0460
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0099-9660
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/chart/top_lifetime_gross/?area=XWW
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058515908806706
https://www.today.com/popculture/return-king-out-dvd-may-25-wbna4472691
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/n2003042570
https://web.archive.org/web/20070616014640/http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,649118,00.html
https://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,649118,00.html
https://www.ign.com/articles/2004/12/08/the-lord-of-the-rings-the-return-of-the-king-special-extended-edition
https://www.theonering.com/peter-jackson-honors-fans-with-their-names-in-credits-of-films-dvds-the-lord-of-the-rings-fan-club-launches-today/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160219074413/http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b875284b6
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/article/ed2322924548/
https://web.archive.org/web/20201230012107/https://www.boxofficemojo.com/article/ed2322924548/
