The Witness for the Prosecution
"The Witness for the Prosecution" is a short story and play by British author Agatha Christie. The story was initially published as "Traitor's Hands" in Flynn's, a weekly pulp magazine, in the edition of 31 January 1925.In 1933, the story was published for the first time as "The Witness for the Prosecution" in the collection The Hound of Death that appeared only in the United Kingdom. In 1948, it was finally published in the United States under that title in the collection The Witness for the Prosecution and Other Stories. The story has been adapted for stage, film and television.


== Plot ==
Leonard Vole is arrested for the murder of Emily French, a wealthy older woman. Unaware that he was a married man, Miss French made him her principal heir, casting suspicion on Leonard. When his wife, Romaine, agrees to testify, she does so not in Leonard's defence but as a witness for the prosecution. Romaine's decision is part of a complicated plan to free her husband. She first gives the prosecution its strongest evidence, then fabricates new evidence that discredits her testimony, believing, correctly as it turns out, that her impeachment as an unfaithful wife would improve Leonard's chances of acquittal far more than her testimony for the defence. It is then revealed that Leonard Vole in fact killed Emily French.


=== Alterations ===
The original short story ended abruptly with the major twist—Romaine's revelation that Leonard Vole was in fact guilty. Over time, Christie grew dissatisfied with this abrupt and dystopian ending (one of the few Christie endings in which a murderer escapes punishment), which would have had to be sanitised in any event for stage and film versions where such a brutal crime going unpunished would have been unthinkable at the time.
In her subsequent rewriting of the story as a play she added a young mistress for Leonard, who does not appear until the end of the play. The mistress and Leonard are about to leave Romaine (called "Christine" in all film and television versions, and most stage productions after the original Broadway production, until the 2016 television version) to be arrested for perjury, when Romaine grabs a knife, and stabs and kills Leonard. She will be defended by the same attorney she tricked into getting Leonard acquitted in the first place. This remained the standard production format until Sarah Phelps' 2016 television version, which restored the original ending but changed the fates of other characters.


== Characters (play) ==
Leonard Vole, the accused
Emily French, the victim
Janet Mackenzie, Emily French's maid
Romaine (subsequently renamed as Christine) Heilger/Vole, "wife" of the accused
Mr Mayhew / Mayherne, the solicitor of the accused
Sir Wilfrid Robarts, QC, senior counsel of the accused
Mr Myers, QC, the Crown prosecutor
Mr Justice Wainwright, the judge
Inspector Hearne, the arresting officer
Greta, Sir Wilfrid's typist
Carter, Sir Wilfrid's clerk


== Publishing history ==
1925: Flynn's Weekly, 31 January – as Traitor's Hands
1933: The Hound of Death
1948: The Witness for the Prosecution and Other Stories
1993: The Mousetrap & Other Plays


== In other media ==


=== Theatre ===

Witness for the Prosecution was adapted as a play by Agatha Christie. The play opened in London on 28 October 1953 at the Winter Garden Theatre, produced by Peter Saunders, and directed by Wallace Douglas. The premiere cast included Derek Blomfield as Leonard Vole, Patricia Jessel as Romaine Vole, and David Horne as Sir Wilfrid Robarts.
2002 Свидетель обвинения (Russia)
2005 Khara Sangaycha Tar (Marathi)
2011 (検察側の証人 [Kensatsugawa no shonin] ) Witness for the Prosecution (Japan)
2018 "奪命証人" Witness for the Prosecution by Carina Lau, Paul Chun Pui and Tse Kwan Ho (Hong Kong)
2018 Tomar Kono Satyo Nei (Bengali)


=== Film ===
A film version of Witness for the Prosecution premiered in 1957 (and reached general release in early 1958), with Tyrone Power as Leonard Vole, Marlene Dietrich as Christine Vole and Charles Laughton as Sir Wilfrid Robarts Q.C. The film was adapted by Larry Marcus, Harry Kurnitz and the film's director, Billy Wilder. The play opened on Broadway on December 16, 1954.
In August 2016, Variety reported that Ben Affleck was in talks to direct and star in a remake of Witness for the Prosecution. Christopher Keyser was to write the script, and Affleck would produce, with Matt Damon, Jennifer Todd and the Agatha Christie estate. The project was never realized.
The 2016 BBC TV mini series  was also issued as a standalone film.


=== Television ===
BBC Television produced Witness for the Prosecution in 1949, with Dale Rogers as Leonard Vole, Mary Kerridge as Romaine Vole and Derek Elphinstone as Sir Wilfrid Robarts Q.C. This version was directed by John Glyn-Jones and adapted by Sidney Budd.
Witness for the Prosecution was next adapted for NBC, also in 1949, with Nicholas Saunders as Leonard Vole. This version aired as part of The Chevrolet Tele-Theatre, and was directed by Gordon Duff.
The 7 November 1950 episode of the CBS anthology series Danger was an adaptation of this story. It was directed by Yul Brynner.
CBS produced a second adaptation of Witness for the Prosecution in 1953, with Tom Drake as Leonard Vole, Andrea King as Romaine Vole and Edward G. Robinson as Sir Wilfrid Robarts Q.C. This version, which aired as part of the anthology series Lux Video Theatre, was directed by Richard Goode and adapted by Anne Howard Bailey.
Hallmark television produced Witness for the Prosecution in 1982, with Beau Bridges as Leonard Vole, Diana Rigg as Christine Vole and Ralph Richardson as Sir Wilfrid Robarts Q.C. This version was based on the Billy Wilder movie with adaptions by John Gay, and was directed by Alan Gibson.
The BBC produced another two-part version of The Witness for the Prosecution for Christmas 2016 and first broadcast on 26 and 27 December, with Kim Cattrall as Emily French, Billy Howle as Leonard Vole, Andrea Riseborough as Romaine Heilger, Toby Jones as John Mayhew, and David Haig as Sir Charles Carter.


== References ==


== External links ==
Flynn's Weekly at Galactic Central4.50 from Paddington
A Caribbean Mystery
A Daughter's a Daughter
A Murder Is Announced
A Pocket Full of Rye
Absent in the Spring
Acquittal
Adaptations of Agatha Christie
After the Funeral
Agatha (film)
Agatha Award
Agatha Christie
Agatha Christie's Secret Notebooks
Agatha Christie's fictional universe
Agatha Christie: A Life in Pictures
Agatha Christie: An Autobiography
Agatha Christie Award (Japan)
Agatha Christie Memorial
Agatha Christie bibliography
Agatha and the Curse of Ishtar
Agatha and the Midnight Murders
Agatha and the Truth of Murder
Akhnaton (play)
Alan Gibson (director)
And Then There Were None
And Then There Were None (play)
Andrea King
Andrea Riseborough
Anne Howard Bailey
Appointment with Death
Appointment with Death (play)
Archie Christie
Ariadne Oliver
Arthur Hastings
Ashfield, Torquay
At Bertram's Hotel
BBC
Beau Bridges
Ben Affleck
Bengali language
Billy Howle
Billy Wilder
Black Coffee (play)
Broadway theatre
Bundle Brent
Butter in a Lordly Dish
By the Pricking of My Thumbs
Cards on the Table
Cat Among the Pigeons
Charles Laughton
Chimneys (play)
Christopher Keyser
Come, Tell Me How You Live
Crooked House
Curtain (novel)
Danger (TV series)
David Haig
Dead Man's Folly
Death Comes as the End
Death in the Clouds
Death on the Nile
Derek Blomfield
Derek Elphinstone
Destination Unknown (novel)
Diana Rigg
Double Sin and Other Stories
Dumb Witness
Edward G. Robinson
Elephants Can Remember
Endless Night (novel)
Evidence
Evil Under the Sun
Fiddlers Three (play)
Five Little Pigs
Giant's Bread
Greenway Estate
Hallowe'en Party
Harry Kurnitz
Heir
Hercule Poirot
Hercule Poirot's Christmas
Hickory Dickory Dock (novel)
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
Inspector Japp
Internet Broadway Database
Jennifer Todd
John Gay (screenwriter)
John Glyn-Jones
Kim Cattrall
Lord Edgware Dies
Lux Video Theatre
Marathi language
Marlene Dietrich
Mary Kerridge
Matt Damon
Max Mallowan
Miss Marple
Miss Marple's Final Cases and Two Other Stories
Mr. Harley Quin
Mrs McGinty's Dead
Murder Is Easy
Murder in Mesopotamia
Murder in the Mews
Murder on the Nile
Murder on the Orient Express
N or M?
Nemesis (Christie novel)
New London Theatre
Nicholas Saunders (actor)
One, Two, Buckle My Shoe (novel)
Ordeal by Innocence
Parker Pyne
Parker Pyne Investigates
Partners in Crime (short story collection)
Passenger to Frankfurt
Patricia Jessel
Peril at End House
Personal Call
Peter Saunders (impresario)
Play (theatre)
Poems (Christie collection)
Poirot's Early Cases
Poirot Investigates
Postern of Fate
Problem at Pollensa Bay and Other Stories
Prosecution
Queen's Counsel
Ralph Richardson
Raymond West (character)
Richard Goode
Sad Cypress
See How They Run (2022 film)
Short story
Sir Henry Clithering
Sleeping Murder
Sparkling Cyanide
Spider's Web (play)
St. Mary Mead
Star Over Bethlehem
Superintendent Battle
Taken at the Flood
The A.B.C. Murders
The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding
The Big Four (novel)
The Body in the Library
The Burden
The Chevrolet Tele-Theatre
The Clocks
The Golden Ball and Other Stories
The Harlequin Tea Set
The Hollow
The Hollow (play)
The Hound of Death
The Labours of Hercules
The Listerdale Mystery
The Man in the Brown Suit
The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side
The Mousetrap
The Mousetrap and Other Plays
The Moving Finger
The Murder at the Vicarage
The Murder of Roger Ackroyd
The Murder on the Links
The Mysterious Affair at Styles
The Mysterious Mr Quin
The Mystery of the Blue Train
The Pale Horse
The Regatta Mystery
The Road of Dreams
The Rose and the Yew Tree
The Secret Adversary
The Secret of Chimneys
The Seven Dials Mystery
The Sittaford Mystery
The Thirteen Problems
The Under Dog and Other Stories
The Unexpected Guest (play)
The Unicorn and the Wasp
The Witness for the Prosecution (TV series)
The Witness for the Prosecution (miniseries)
The Witness for the Prosecution and Other Stories
The Yellow Iris (radio drama)
They Came to Baghdad
They Do It with Mirrors
Third Girl
Three Act Tragedy
Three Blind Mice (radio play and short story)
Three Blind Mice and Other Stories
Toby Jones
Tom Drake
Tommy and Tuppence
Towards Zero
Tyrone Power
Unfinished Portrait (novel)
Variety (magazine)
Verdict (play)
Wallace Douglas
Wasp's Nest
While the Light Lasts and Other Stories
Why Didn't They Ask Evans?
Witness for the Prosecution (1957 film)
Witness for the Prosecution (1982 television production)
Witness for the Prosecution (disambiguation)
Witness for the Prosecution (play)
Yul Brynner
http://www.philsp.com/mags/flynns.html
https://variety.com/2016/film/news/ben-affleck-witness-for-the-prosecution-1201841040/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0637971/
https://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-08-15/kim-cattrall-toby-jones-and-andrea-riseborough-cast-in-agatha-christies-the-witness-for-the-prosecution/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/MovieDetails/52448
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt5834256/?ref_=fn_al_tt_4
https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b7ff14a88
http://www.andreaking.com/WitnessForTheProsecutionPage.htm
https://www.nytimes.com/1982/12/03/arts/lively-witness-for-the-prosecution.html
https://www.ibdb.com/broadway-production/witness-for-the-prosecution-2485
