The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Guns of Navarone is a 1961 action adventure war film directed by J. Lee Thompson from a screenplay by Carl Foreman, based on Alistair MacLean's 1957 novel of the same name. Foreman also produced the film. The film stars Gregory Peck, David Niven and Anthony Quinn, along with Stanley Baker, Anthony Quayle, Irene Papas, Gia Scala, Richard Harris and James Darren. The book and the film share a plot: the efforts of an Allied commando unit to destroy a seemingly impregnable German fortress that threatens Allied naval ships in the Aegean Sea.


== Plot ==
In 1943, the Axis powers plan an assault on the island of Kheros, where 2,000 British soldiers are marooned, to display their military strength and convince neutral Turkey to join them. Rescue by the Royal Navy is prevented by two massive radar-directed large-calibre guns on (fictional) nearby Navarone Island. When aerial bombing efforts fail, Allied Intelligence gathers a commando unit to infiltrate Navarone and destroy the guns. Led by Major Roy Franklin, the team is composed of Captain Keith Mallory, a renowned spy and an officer with the Long Range Desert Group (LRDG); Colonel Andrea Stavros from the Greek Army; Franklin's best friend Corporal Miller, an explosives expert and former chemistry teacher; Greco-American Spyros Pappadimos, a native of Navarone; and "The Butcher of Barcelona" Brown, an engineer and expert knife fighter.
Disguised as Greek fishermen on a decrepit fishing vessel, they sail across the Aegean Sea, where they successfully overwhelm the crew of a German patrol boat intercepting them. Later in the voyage, Mallory confides to Franklin that Stavros had sworn to kill him after the war because Mallory was inadvertently responsible for the deaths of Stavros's wife and children. After being shipwrecked on the coast of Navarone during a storm, the experienced mountaineer Mallory leads the team in a climb up the cliff, during which Franklin badly injures his leg. While taking shelter in the mountains, Mallory stops Franklin from killing himself and lies to him that their mission has been scrubbed, and that a major naval attack will be mounted on the coast instead. They rendezvous with two local resistance fighters, Spyros' sister Maria and her friend Anna, who was once captured and tortured by the Germans before escaping.
German soldiers continually dog the mission. The group is eventually captured in the town of Mandrakos by Oberleutnant Muesel while trying to find a doctor for Franklin (whose leg is infected with gangrene). While being interrogated by SS Hauptsturmführer Sessler, Stavros distracts the Germans and the team overpower their captors. They escape in German uniforms, leaving Franklin behind to receive medical attention. In due course, Franklin is injected with scopolamine and gives up Mallory's misinformation, as Mallory had hoped. Most forces leave the fortress to counter the expected coastal attack. Upon infiltrating the village of Navarone, however, Miller discovers most of his explosives have been sabotaged and deduces that Anna is the culprit. She confesses that she did not escape but that the Germans recruited her as an informer in exchange for her release. Mallory reluctantly prepares to execute Anna to prevent detection, but Maria intervenes instead and shoots her dead.
The team splits up: Mallory and Miller go for the guns, Stavros and Spyros create distractions in town (assisted by local residents), and Maria and Brown steal a boat for their escape. Spyros dies in a shootout with a German officer, and Brown is stabbed during the boat theft due to his reluctance to kill a guard. Meanwhile, Mallory and Miller infiltrate the gun emplacement but set off an alarm when they seal the doors behind them. Miller plants explosives on the guns and prepares a large booby trap below an ammunition hoist, with a trigger device set into the track of the hoist. The Germans eventually force entry into the gun emplacement and defuse the explosives planted on the guns; meanwhile, Mallory and Miller make their escape down the cliff and are picked up from the sea by the stolen boat. A wounded Stavros is also able to reach the sea and is helped aboard by Mallory, thus resolving the blood feud between them.
As the Allied destroyers trying to rescue the trapped British troops appear, the Germans open fire at them. When the hoist eventually reaches Miller's trigger, the hidden explosives set off the surrounding shells in a massive explosion, totally destroying the guns and the entire fortress. Mallory's team safely reaches the British convoy. However, Stavros shakes Mallory's hand and decides to return to Navarone with Maria, with whom he has fallen in love. Mallory and Miller, returning home, observe the aftermath of their success from a destroyer.


== Cast ==

Peter Grant, future music manager of the Yardbirds, Led Zeppelin and Bad Company, played an uncredited British commando.


== Production ==
The film was part of a cycle of big-budget World War II adventures that included The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957), The Longest Day (1962) and The Great Escape (1963). MacLean's novel had been a bestseller and was read by Mike Frankovich, head of Columbia Pictures, who became excited as to its cinematic possibilities. He showed it to Carl Foreman, who had written Bridge on the River Kwai and had a producing deal with Columbia, who was not as enthusiastic at first, in part because he knew how difficult making a movie version would be. Foreman eventually changed his mind and agreed to make the movie. The novel had been inspired by the Battle of Leros during the Dodecanese Campaign of World War II but the guns on Leros were 152 mm (6 in), not the huge guns described in the book and the film. The screenplay, adapted by producer Carl Foreman, made significant changes from the novel; these included changing the gender of the local resistance fighters and inventing a conflict between Mallory and Andrea.
Foreman wanted to direct as well, but Columbia refused, insisting on a British director. The job went to Alexander Mackendrick (director of The Sweet Smell of Success), who said he "wanted to take what was essentially a typical, action-packed wartime melodrama and give it some pretentious overtones." Mackendrick left the production in March 1960, a week before shooting started, due to an alleged severe back ailment. It was later suggested he was fired by Foreman  due to "creative differences". He was replaced by J. Lee Thompson, in part because star Gregory Peck was impressed by North West Frontier. The role played by Niven was originally intended for Kenneth More. Foreman had written the part for More, but the head of Rank, John Davis, refused to lend More out for the film.


=== Shooting ===
The Greek island of Rhodes provided locations—the unit was based on there from April to July 1960. Quinn was so taken with the area that he bought land there in an area still called Anthony Quinn Bay. Some further scenes were shot on the islands of Gozo, near Malta, and Tino, in the Ligurian Sea. One of the warships in the film, the destroyer escort USS Slater, then a training ship in the Hellenic Navy known as Aetos (D-01), is preserved as a museum ship in Albany, New York.As described by director Thompson in the DVD commentary track, David Niven became severely ill after shooting sequences in a dirty pool of water underneath the cave elevator and could have died from a serious infection, remaining in the hospital for some weeks as the crew completed other portions of the cave sequence. Since key scenes with Niven remained incomplete, and it was doubtful whether he would return to finish the film, the entire production was in jeopardy. Reshooting key scenes throughout the film with another actor and abandoning the project to collect the insurance were contemplated. Against medical advice, Niven felt obligated to complete his work and agreed to shoot and complete his scenes. However, he relapsed and did not recover for another seven weeks.
A complication arose when it was found that Gregory Peck, whose character was supposed to be fluent in German, could not speak the language convincingly. Voice actor Robert Rietty dubbed all of Peck's German dialogue for the film. The film's maps were created by Halas and Batchelor, a British team best known for their animated films. Although the island of Navarone is fictional, a map depicted in the film purporting to show the island of Navarone shows it as the real island of Antikythera. Several members of the Greek royal family visited the set the day the Mandrakos cafe scene was filmed and appear in the background as extras.


== Soundtrack ==
The film's score was composed by Dimitri Tiomkin and featured arrangements of several traditional songs.

"The Guns of Navarone" (music by Dimitri Tiomkin, lyrics by Paul Francis Webster)
"Karagouna" (traditional, arranged by Andreas Markides)
"Ena Karavi Apo Ti Chio" (traditional, arranged by Andreas Markides)
"Yalo Yalo" (traditional, arranged by Andreas Markides)
"Treu Sein" (music by Dimitri Tiomkin, lyrics by Alfred Perry)
"Das Sundenlied" (music by Dimitri Tiomkin, lyrics by Alfred Perry)Tiomkin's theme song featured on the soundtrack album with lyrics recounting the film's plot. His theme became a popular instrumental with several cover versions including a 1965 version by The Skatalites. Other cover versions were performed by Johnny Griffin, Al Caiola and the Hollyridge Strings.


== Release and reception ==


=== Box office ===
The Guns of Navarone had its Royal World Premiere in aid of the Edwina Mountbatten Trust and in the presence of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II and His Royal Highness Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh on 27 April 1961, at the Odeon Leicester Square in London's West End. The film grossed $28.9 million at the box office generating theatrical rentals of $13 million in the United States and Canada and was the second top-grossing film of 1961. It earned worldwide rentals of $25 million.


=== Critics ===
Reviews were mostly positive; Bosley Crowther of The New York Times called the film "one of those muscle-loaded pictures in the thundering tradition of DeMille, which means more emphasis is placed on melodrama than on character or credibility." He added that while the film was predictable, "for anyone given to letting himself be entertained by scenes of explosive action and individual heroic displays, there should be entertainment in this picture, for there is plenty of all that in it." Variety wrote that the film was "the sort of spectacular drama that can ignore any TV competition and, even with its flaws, should have patrons firmly riveted throughout its lengthy narrative. With a bunch of weighty stars, terrific special effects, several socko situations plus good camerawork and other technical okays, Foreman and director J. Lee Thompson have sired a winner." Harrison's Reports gave a grade of "Excellent," stating: "The script, direction, acting (by a brilliant cast) and photography are all prizeworthy." Richard L. Coe of The Washington Post called the film "a magnificently detailed cliff-hanger of spectacular settings and deeds of impossible derring-do ... What makes this one of the good ones is superlative photography of the storied Grecian isles, a crackerjack cast and a yarn about WWII in which unlikely incident succeeds unlikely incident with rare largesse."John L. Scott of the Los Angeles Times called it "the best adventure movie to hit the screen this year," adding, "Some viewers will deplore a lack of character motivation—the origins of the six heroes are passed by rather quickly at the beginning—and women may yearn for more romantic passages in the film—but most of us, I am sure, will be satisfied with the epic suspense and sweep of this highly pictorial adventure." Brendan Gill of The New Yorker called it one of those movies "that are no less thrilling because they are so preposterous ... Let me also confess that I was held more or less spellbound all the way through this many-colored rubbish". The Monthly Film Bulletin thought the film fell well short of its ambitions, finding that Foreman's script had "too much diffusion, too much talk, and too many themes raised and dropped, so that the adventure story is not lifted to another plane but overstretched, robbed of the tight narrative concentration needed for a mounting tension." The review also criticized director Thompson for lacking "the ability of the Hollywood veterans to hold a long picture together" and instead of moving the action forward "in a series of jerks." As of August 2020, the film held a 92% rating on the review-aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes based on 24 reviews, with an average score of 7.93 out of 10.


== Awards and honours ==
The film is recognized by the American Film Institute in the following list:

AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills—#89


== Sequel ==
In 1968, author Alistair MacLean reunited Mallory, Miller, and Stavros in the best-selling novel Force 10 From Navarone, the only sequel of his long writing career. That was in turn filmed as the significantly different Force 10 from Navarone in 1978 by British director Guy Hamilton, a veteran of several James Bond films. The cast included Robert Shaw, Harrison Ford and Edward Fox. Though the sequel was a modest success, it did not match the original critically or commercially.


== In popular culture ==
The 1981 video game Castle Wolfenstein was inspired by the film
The climax of 1988 movie Commando (1988 film) is inspired by Guns of Navarone.
In the 2005 video game Call of Duty: United Offensive, a single player mission entitled "Sicily" is based in part on the scenery and events of the film, as well as the SAS attack on the Lamba Doria coastal gun battery during the Allied invasion of Sicily. 
On The Dick Van Dyke Show, in the episode "You're Under Arrest", Rob Petrie (Dick Van Dyke) claims to have fallen asleep while watching the film at a drive-in theater, an alibi of which the police are skeptical. In the episode "Bupkis", Petrie sings a song that he has written for The Alan Brady Show (the show-within-a-show in the series) titled "The Guns of Navarone" to an old army buddy
In the Wu-Tang Forever double album, Method Man cites The Guns of Navarone in the track "Triumph"
In Pulp Fiction, Jules Winnfield, played by Samuel L. Jackson, says to John Travolta's Vincent Vega: "Every time my fingers touch brain, I'm Superfly TNT. I'm The Guns of the [sic] Navarone."
The Guns of Navarone by the Jamaican band the Skatalites (1965) is a Ska standard, which reached #36 in the British pop charts in 1968 and has been covered by many Ska bands since.


== References ==


== External links ==

The Guns of Navarone at IMDb
The Guns of Navarone at AllMovie
The Guns of Navarone at Rotten Tomatoes
The Guns of Navarone at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Guns of Navarone at the TCM Movie Database
The Guns of Navarone at TV Guide (heavily cut and revised version of 1987 write-up originally published in The Motion Picture Guide)10 to Midnight
12 Years a Slave (film)
14th Directors Guild of America Awards
15th British Academy Film Awards
1917 (2019 film)
1961 in film
19th Golden Globe Awards
34th Academy Awards
4th Annual Grammy Awards
A. R. Rahman
AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Great American Tragedy
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Star Is Born (1976 soundtrack)
A Walk in the Clouds (soundtrack)
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Action film
Adventure film
Aegean Sea
Air Force One Is Down
Al Caiola
Aladdin (1992 soundtrack)
Alan Jay Lerner
Alan Menken
Alan Osbiston
Albany, New York
Albert Lieven
Alex Ebert
Alex North
Alexander Mackendrick
Alexandre Desplat
Alistair MacLean
AllMovie
All About Lawrence of Arabia
All Is Lost
All the King's Men (1949 film)
Allan Cuthbertson
Allied invasion of Sicily
Allies of World War II
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Film Institute
Ammunition hoist
An Alligator Named Daisy
Anne of the Thousand Days
Anthony Quayle
Anthony Quinn
Antikythera
Apocalypse Now
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
As Long as They're Happy
Athabasca (novel)
Atonement (2007 film)
Atonement (soundtrack)
Atticus Ross
Avatar (2009 film)
Axis powers
BAFTA Award for Best British Screenplay
Babel (film)
Babylon (soundtrack)
Bad Company
Battle for the Planet of the Apes
Battle of Leros
Bear Island (film)
Bear Island (novel)
Beauty and the Beast (1991 soundtrack)
Becket (1964 film)
Before Winter Comes
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Bestseller
Bill Warrington
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Bosley Crowther
Boyhood (2014 film)
Breakheart Pass (film)
Breakheart Pass (novel)
Brendan Gill
Brian Easdale
Brokeback Mountain
Bryan Forbes
Bugsy
Burkhard Dallwitz
Burt Bacharach
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
Caboblanco
Call of Duty: United Offensive
Camelot (film)
Cape Fear (1962 film)
Captain Cook (book)
Caravan to Vaccarès
Caravan to Vaccarès (film)
Carl Foreman
Carmine Coppola
Castle Wolfenstein
Cecil B. DeMille
Chinatown (1974 film)
Chris Greenham
Christopher Rhodes
Circus (novel)
Columbia Pictures
Commando
Commando (1988 film)
Cong Su
Conquest of the Planet of the Apes
Country Dance (film)
Cover version
Craig Armstrong (composer)
Dances with Wolves
Dario Marianelli
David Byrne
David Niven
Death Train
Death Wish 4: The Crackdown
Destroyer escort
Dick Van Dyke
Dimitri Tiomkin
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Doctor Zhivago (soundtrack)
Dodecanese Campaign
Dominic Frontiere
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (soundtrack)
East of Eden (film)
East of Piccadilly
Edward Fox (actor)
Edwina Mountbatten Trust
Elliot Goldenthal
Elmer Bernstein
Ennio Morricone
Ernest Gold
Eye of the Devil
Fear Is the Key
Fear Is the Key (film)
Firewalker (film)
First Man (soundtrack)
Flashdance
Floodgate (novel)
For Better, for Worse (1954 film)
For Them That Trespass
Force 10 From Navarone (novel)
Force 10 from Navarone
Force 10 from Navarone (film)
Forrest Gump
Fortress
Francis Ford Coppola
Francis Lai
Franz Waxman
Frederick Loewe
Frida (soundtrack)
Gabriel Yared
Gangrene
Gentleman's Agreement
George Mikell
Gia Scala
Giorgio Moroder
Gladiator (2000 film)
Gladiator (2000 soundtrack)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score
Golden Rendezvous
Goodbye California
Gorillas in the Mist
Gozo
Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media
Greek Americans
Greek Royal Family
Gregory Peck
Guns of Navarone (song)
Guy Hamilton
HMS Ulysses (novel)
Halas and Batchelor
Hans Zimmer
Happy Birthday to Me (film)
Harrison's Reports
Harrison Ford
Hauptsturmführer
Hawaii (1966 film)
Heaven & Earth (soundtrack)
Hellenic Army
Hellenic Navy
High Noon
Hildur Guðnadóttir
Hollyridge Strings
Howard Shore
Huckleberry Finn (1974 film)
Hyoscine hydrobromide
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Aim at the Stars
Ice Cold in Alex
Ice Station Zebra
Ice Station Zebra (novel)
In the Heat of the Night (film)
International Film Music Critics Association
International Film Music Critics Association Award for Best New Archival Release of an Existing Score – Re-Release or Re-Recording
Irene Papas
Isaac Hayes
J. Lee Thompson
James Bond
James Darren
James Horner
James Robertson Justice
Jaws (soundtrack)
John Barry (composer)
John Cox (sound engineer)
John Goldfarb, Please Come Home!
John Travolta
John Williams
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Johnny Green
Johnny Griffin
Joker (soundtrack)
Jon Batiste
Jonathan Livingston Seagull (film)
Jules Winnfield
Justin Hurwitz
Jóhann Jóhannsson
Kenneth Ascher
Kenneth More
King Solomon's Mines (1985 film)
Kings of the Sun
Kinjite: Forbidden Subjects
Kitarō
Kramer vs. Kramer
La La Land (soundtrack)
Large-calibre artillery
Laurel Awards
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Led Zeppelin
Life of Pi (soundtrack)
Life with Father (film)
Ligurian Sea
Lisa Gerrard
London's West End
Long Range Desert Group
Los Angeles Times
Love Story (1970 film)
Ludovic Bource
Mackenna's Gold
Malta
Maurice Jarre
Max Steiner
Memoirs of a Geisha (soundtrack)
Messenger of Death
Method Man
Michael Giacchino
Michael Trubshawe
Midnight Express (film)
Mike Frankovich
Moonlight (2016 film)
Moulin Rouge!
Mountaineering
Murder Without Crime
Murphy's Law (film)
Museum ship
Music manager
Music of Dune (2021 film)
Mychael Danna
Navarone Island
Neil Diamond
Night Watch (1995 film)
Night Without End (novel)
Nino Rota
No Place for Jennifer
No Trees in the Street
Nomadland
Norman Wooland
North West Frontier (film)
Oberleutnant
Odeon Leicester Square
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Beach (1959 film)
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Ordinary People
Oswald Morris
Out of Africa (film)
Palmaria (island)
Partisans (novel)
Paul Francis Webster
Paul Williams (songwriter)
Percy Herbert (actor)
Peter Grant (music manager)
Philip Glass
Platoon (film)
Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh
Pulp Fiction
Puppet on a Chain
Puppet on a Chain (film)
Queen Elizabeth II
Radar
Rain Man
Return from the Ashes
Rhodes
Richard Harris
Richard L. Coe
River of Death
River of Death (film)
Rob Petrie
Robert Rietty
Robert Shaw (British actor)
Rocky
Rotten Tomatoes
Royal Navy
Ryuichi Sakamoto
Samuel L. Jackson
San Andreas (novel)
Santorini (novel)
Saving Private Ryan
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Seawitch
Sense and Sensibility (film)
September Affair
Shaft (Isaac Hayes album)
Sic
Slumdog Millionaire
Slumdog Millionaire: Music from the Motion Picture
Soul (soundtrack)
South by Java Head
Spartacus (film)
St. Ives (1976 film)
Stanley Baker
Star Wars (soundtrack)
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Sunset Boulevard (soundtrack)
TV Guide
Taras Bulba (1962 film)
Terms of Endearment
The Alamo (1960 film)
The Ambassador (1984 American film)
The Artist (soundtrack)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Aviator (soundtrack)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Cardinal
The Chairman (1969 film)
The Dark Crusader
The Defiant Ones
The Descendants
The Dick Van Dyke Show
The English Patient (film)
The English Patient (soundtrack)
The Evil That Men Do (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The Fall of the Roman Empire (film)
The French Connection (film)
The Godfather
The Godfather (soundtrack)
The Golden Gate (MacLean novel)
The Golden Rendezvous
The Good Companions (1957 film)
The Great Escape (film)
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Greek Tycoon
The Guns of Navarone (novel)
The Hateful Eight (soundtrack)
The Hollywood Reporter
The Hostage Tower
The Hours (film)
The Inspector General (1949 film)
The Last Emperor
The Last Emperor (album)
The Last Frontier (novel)
The Legend of 1900 (soundtrack)
The Lion King (1994 soundtrack)
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Little Mermaid (1989 soundtrack)
The Little Prince (1974 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (soundtrack)
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Middle Watch (1940 film)
The Mission (soundtrack)
The Monthly Film Bulletin
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Orange County Register
The Painted Veil (soundtrack)
The Passage (1979 film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Price of Folly
The Red Shoes (1948 film)
The Reincarnation of Peter Proud
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Robe (film)
The Satan Bug
The Satan Bug (novel)
The Secret Ways
The Shape of Water (soundtrack)
The Sheltering Sky (soundtrack)
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Skatalites
The Social Network
The Social Network (soundtrack)
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Stunt Man
The Sweet Smell of Success
The Theory of Everything (soundtrack)
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Truman Show: Music from the Motion Picture
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Washington Post
The Way to Dusty Death
The Weak and the Wicked
The White Buffalo
The Yardbirds
The Yellow Balloon (film)
Theatrical rental
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Tiger Bay (1959 film)
Tino (island)
Titanic: Music from the Motion Picture
Titanic (1997 film)
To Kill a Mockingbird (film)
Trent Reznor
Turner Classic Movies
Tutte Lemkow
UNACO
USS Slater (DE-766)
Up (soundtrack)
Variety (magazine)
Victor Young
Vincent Vega
Walter Gotell
War film
What a Way to Go!
When Eight Bells Toll
When Eight Bells Toll (film)
Where Eagles Dare
Widow (1976 film)
Woman in a Dressing Gown
World War II
Wu-Tang Forever
Yield to the Night
http://newyorktraveler.net/aboard-the-uss-slater-in-albany-ny
http://www.the-numbers.com/movies/1961/0GOFN.php
http://www.tv.com/shows/the-dick-van-dyke-show/youre-under-arrest-11874/
http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/21984/The-Guns-of-Navarone/articles.html
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1962
http://www.moviequotedb.com/movies/pulp-fiction/quote_19035.html
https://genius.com/28783
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v21177
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0054953/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0559871/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/guns_of_navarone/
http://digg.com/2017/wolfenstein-games-history
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/22407
https://www.tvguide.com/movies/the-guns-of-navarone/review/125331/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/21984/enwp
https://books.google.com/books?id=2u5ZDgAAQBAJ&pg=PT280
https://web.archive.org/web/20130709021222/http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/21984/The-Guns-of-Navarone/articles.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20111210095401/http://newyorktraveler.net/aboard-the-uss-slater-in-albany-ny/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130607074243/http://www.the-numbers.com/movies/1961/0GOFN.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20190417062137/https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/guns_of_navarone
https://web.archive.org/web/20150402003704/http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1962
https://web.archive.org/web/20190819172201/http://digg.com/2017/wolfenstein-games-history
https://web.archive.org/web/20120616091754/http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0559871/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130513163355/http://www.tv.com/shows/the-dick-van-dyke-show/youre-under-arrest-11874/
https://web.archive.org/web/20161221024852/http://www.moviequotedb.com/movies/pulp-fiction/quote_19035.html
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/guns_of_navarone
https://viaggiart.com/en/portovenere/point-of-interest/140711/isola-di-palmaria-sito-unesco-cinque-terre.html
http://www.operation-ladbroke.com/paddy-maynes-decision-the-attack-on-the-second-battery/
