The Rose Tattoo (film)
The Rose Tattoo is a 1955 American film adaptation of the Tennessee Williams play of the same name. It was adapted by Williams and Hal Kanter and directed by Daniel Mann, with stars Anna Magnani, Burt Lancaster, Marisa Pavan and Jo Van Fleet. Williams originally wrote the play for Italian Anna Magnani to play on Broadway in 1951, but she declined the offer because of her difficulty with the English language at the time. By the time of this film adaptation, she was ready.Anna Magnani won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance, and the film won
Best Art Direction and Best Cinematography receiving five other nominations including Best Picture and Best Supporting Actress for Pavan.


== Plot ==
Serafina Delle Rose (Anna Magnani), a Sicilian seamstress, living in a community in proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, fiercely proud of and loyal to her truck-driving husband Rosario, is pregnant with her second child. While he is sleeping, Estelle (Virginia Grey) asks Serafina to make a shirt for her lover from some expensive silk material; Serafina does not know that the lover is Rosario, and that earlier that afternoon, Estelle got a tattoo of a rose on her chest to match Rosario's.
That night, Rosario is killed in an accident while trying to evade police during a smuggling run. When Serafina discovers her beloved husband's demise she collapses, and later the local doctor informs her daughter Rosa (Marisa Pavan) and the women of the neighborhood that Serafina has miscarried.
Three years later, Serafina has become a recluse, allowing her appearance and reputation to deteriorate, to Rosa's embarrassment. Serafina decides to attend her daughter's graduation, but two prostitutes arrive demanding Serafina quickly mend their bandanas for a political convention. Serafina reluctantly does so, but is appalled by their talk of men and reprimands them. One of the women, Bessie (Jo Van Fleet), takes offense and mocks Serafina with Rosario's infidelity. Serafina sits alone in the dark until Rosa comes home, and is infuriated when Rosa introduces her to her new sailor boyfriend Jack Hunter (Ben Cooper). After her interrogation, he confides that he is a virgin.  She forces him to vow before a statue of the Virgin Mary that he will respect Rosa's innocence.
Determined to find out the truth about her husband, Serafina heads to the church (where a bazaar is being held) to ask the priest if her husband had confessed to an affair with another woman. When he refuses to answer, she attacks him, and a truck driver named Alvaro (Burt Lancaster) pulls her off. Alvaro drives the dazed Serafina home in his banana truck, where she offers to repair his torn shirt. Serafina loans Alvaro the rose silk shirt that she had sewn the night of her husband's death until she is able to repair it, and they agree to meet later that night.
Alvaro returns, having impulsively gotten a rose tattooed on his chest. Serafina is disgusted and tries to throw him out, then demands that Alvaro drive her to a club her husband used to attend. Once there, she meets Estelle, who confesses and shows Serafina the rose tattooed on her chest as a symbol of her love for Rosario. Returning home, Serafina smashes the urn containing Rosario's ashes, and invites Alvaro to return in the night.
Alvaro turns up hours later severely intoxicated and, mortified by his actions, Serafina leaves him in a drunken stupor and retires to bed. That night Rosa returns home and falls asleep on the sofa; Alvaro awakens and, still drunk, mistakes Rosa for Serafina and tries to kiss her; Rosa wakes up and screams, and Serafina gets rid of him.
The following morning Serafina finds him on top of a boat mast outside her house begging for her forgiveness. Serafina and Rosa are extremely embarrassed and Serafina refuses to leave the house in order to make him come down, much to Rosa's frustration. At that moment Jack arrives and asks Serafina if he can marry Rosa. Serafina is stunned, but seeing that this is what Rosa wants she gives them her consent and they leave to be married. Serafina then calls Alvaro down from the boat mast before declaring in front of her neighbors that they have to pick up from where they left off the night before. They enter her house and shut the door. A lively pop tune is heard starting up on Serafina's player piano, along with the sounds of their partying and laughter.


== Cast ==
Anna Magnani as Serafina Delle Rose
Burt Lancaster as Alvaro Mangiacavallo
Marisa Pavan as Rosa Delle Rose
Ben Cooper as Seaman Jack Hunter
Virginia Grey as Estelle Hohengarten
Jo Van Fleet as Bessie
Sandro Giglio as Father De Leo
Mimi Aguglia as Assunta
Florence Sundstrom as Flora
Jeanne Hart as Violetta


== Production and release ==
Much of the film was shot on location in Key West, Florida, although the setting is not specifically mentioned in the film.  The house featured in the film stands to this day and is known, appropriately, as the "Rose Tattoo House".
The house was given Italian furniture and objects, as well as wallpaper not characteristic of houses in Key West at the time.The premiere of the film was held in New York City at the Hotel Astor on December 12, 1955, with Arthur Miller, Marlon Brando, Marilyn Monroe and Jayne Mansfield among the celebrities in attendance.


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
The Rose Tattoo at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Rose Tattoo at IMDb 
The Rose Tattoo at AllMovie
The Rose Tattoo at the TCM Movie Database
The Rose Tattoo at Rotten Tomatoes10th British Academy Film Awards
13th Golden Globe Awards
1955 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
28th Academy Awards
8th Directors Guild of America Awards
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Dream of Kings (film)
A House Not Meant to Stand
A Lovely Sunday for Creve Coeur
A Streetcar Named Desire
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
A Streetcar Named Success
About Mrs. Leslie
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Ada (1961 film)
Alex North
AllMovie
Anna Magnani
Arthur Krams
Arthur Miller
Auto-da-Fé (play)
BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role
BUtterfield 8
Baby Doll
Ben Cooper
Boom! (film)
Broadway (theatre)
Burt Lancaster
Camino Real (play)
Candles to the Sun
Cat on a Hot Tin Roof
Clothes for a Summer Hotel
Come Back, Little Sheba (1952 film)
Daniel Mann
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Edith Head
Film adaptation
Five Finger Exercise
Florence Sundstrom
For Love of Ivy
Fugitive Kind
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture
Gulf of Mexico
Hal B. Wallis
Hal Kanter
Hal Pereira
Hard Candy: A Book of Stories
Hot Spell (film)
Hotel Astor
I'll Cry Tomorrow
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
In Masks Outrageous and Austere
In the Bar of a Tokyo Hotel
Interval (1973 film)
Italian people
James Wong Howe
Jayne Mansfield
Jo Van Fleet
Journey into Fear (1975 film)
Judith (1966 film)
Key West, Florida
List of one-act plays by Tennessee Williams
Lost in the Stars (1974 film)
Marilyn Monroe
Marisa Pavan
Marlon Brando
Matilda (1978 film)
Maurie (film)
Mimi Aguglia
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Award for Best Actress
National Board of Review Awards 1955
New York City
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress
Not About Nightingales
Orpheus Descending
Our Man Flint
Out Cry
Paramount Pictures
Period of Adjustment
Player piano
Playing for Time (film)
Robert Osborne
Rotten Tomatoes
Samuel M. Comer
Shanghai International Film Festival
Small Craft Warnings
Something Cloudy, Something Clear
Spring Storm
Stairs to the Roof
Suddenly, Last Summer (film)
Suddenly Last Summer
Summer and Smoke
Sweet Bird of Youth
Tambi Larsen
Ten Blocks on the Camino Real
Tennessee Williams
The Catastrophe of Success
The Fugitive Kind
The Glass Menagerie
The Glass Menagerie (1950 film)
The Last Angry Man
The Loss of a Teardrop Diamond
The Man Who Broke 1,000 Chains
The Milk Train Doesn't Stop Here Anymore
The Mountain Road
The New York Times
The Night of the Iguana
The Notebook of Trigorin
The Red Devil Battery Sign
The Revengers (film)
The Rose Tattoo
The Seven Descents of Myrtle
The Teahouse of the August Moon (film)
The Two-Character Play
This Is (An Entertainment)
Turner Classic Movies
Vieux Carré (play)
Virginia Grey
WLRN-FM
Warren Low
Who's Been Sleeping in My Bed?
Who's Got the Action?
Will Mr. Merriweather Return from Memphis?
Willard (1971 film)
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/42127/The-Rose-Tattoo/awards
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048563/
https://archive.org/details/65yearsofoscarof00osbo/page/137
https://web.archive.org/web/20090228001107/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/42127/The-Rose-Tattoo/awards
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/rose_tattoo/reviews
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/53459
https://www.wlrn.org/culture/2016-03-22/rose-tattoo-house-reborn-in-key-west
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v454541
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/88659/enwp
