The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Turning Point is a 1977 American drama film centered on the world of ballet in New York City, written by Arthur Laurents and directed by Herbert Ross. The film stars Shirley MacLaine and Anne Bancroft, along with Leslie Browne, Mikhail Baryshnikov, and Tom Skerritt. The film was nominated for eleven Academy Awards, including Best Picture. The script is a fictionalized version of the real-life Brown family and the friendship between ballerinas Isabel Mirrow Brown (whose daughter, Leslie Browne, stars in the film) and Nora Kaye.


== Plot ==
DeeDee Rodgers leaves an eminent New York ballet company after becoming pregnant by Wayne, another dancer in the company. They marry and later move to Oklahoma City to run a dance studio. Emma Jacklin stays with the company and eventually becomes a prima ballerina and well-known figure in the ballet community.
While the company is on tour and performs a show in Oklahoma City, DeeDee and the family go to see the show and then have an after-party for the company at their home. The reunion stirs up old memories and things begin to unravel.
At the party, DeeDee's daughter Emilia, an aspiring dancer who is also Emma's goddaughter, is invited to take class with the company the following day. Afterwards, Emilia is asked to join the company but she does not immediately accept the offer as she wants to think it over. DeeDee and Wayne decide that DeeDee should go to New York with Emilia, who is rather shy and does not make friends as easily as her younger sister. Meanwhile, their son, Ethan, gets a scholarship to the company's summer program while Wayne and their other daughter stay in Oklahoma City.
Once in New York, they rent several rooms in Carnegie Hall with Madame Dakharova, a ballet coach. Emilia soon starts a relationship with a Russian dancer in the company, Yuri. DeeDee runs into the former conductor of the company and has an affair with him, which causes conflict between Emilia and DeeDee. Meanwhile, Emma argues with Arnold, the choreographer, about giving her a better role in his new ballet, which he refuses and leads Emma to suggest Emilia for the role instead. It is also revealed Emma has been seeing a married man, Carter. During rehearsal, Emilia has an argument with Arnold and storms out, going to a bar and getting drunk. She then shows up for the performance that night still drunk and Emma takes care of her, angering DeeDee. Emilia suffers when she sees Yuri getting involved with another dancer, Carolyn.
Emma and DeeDee eventually enter into major conflict. DeeDee resents that Emma dotes on Emilia, when she has criticized DeeDee for choosing family life over her career while Emma chose not to have children. DeeDee accuses Emma of telling her to get pregnant and have Wayne's baby so Emma could play the lead in Anna Karenina, which Emma later admits is true.
Eventually, misunderstandings are settled, with Emma and DeeDee working things out after a physical altercation. Emilia is announced as the star of the next season, and she and Yuri make up and agree to a professional partnership and nothing more. Deedee decides she is content with her life and the decision she made to leave professional ballet to have a family. Emma accepts that her performing days are numbered and she must embrace a different role within the company. DeeDee and Emma step onto the stage and reminisce together.


== Cast ==

A number of actresses were offered the roles of Emma and DeeDee, including Audrey Hepburn, Grace Kelly, and Doris Day.Bancroft had no previous dance experience, while MacLaine had started her career as a dancer of ballet and other types. She appeared on Broadway performing in the musicals Me and Juliet and The Pajama Game.
The title "The Turning Point" is a double entendre, meaning a big change in a person's life and being on pointe.
Choreography for the film was done by Alvin Ailey and George Balanchine.


== Background ==
Isabel Mirrow Brown and Nora Kaye were childhood friends. Their parents had immigrated from Russia around the same time and they lived in the same New York City brownstone building. Kaye was a few years older than Mirrow and encouraged her to train. Nora Kaye was in a relationship with Jerome Robbins in the early 1950s, but they never married, focusing on their careers instead. Robbins was also a known bisexual.Isabel Mirrow danced with American Ballet Theatre from 1947 until 1953. Nora was with the company from its inception in 1939 until 1951, and later returned in a leadership role. Unlike in the film, Isabel did not get pregnant while she was with the company; however, during this time Isabel married fellow dancer Kelly Brown, who was widely sought after. Lucia Chase was the head of the company when Isabel and Nora were there.
Kaye continued to dance in New York with other companies and became a more prominent figure in the ballet world, while Isabel had stopped performing to marry and have children. Her first child, Leslie Browne, born in 1957, was Nora Kaye's goddaughter. Kaye went on to marry director Herbert Ross in 1959. The two couples were close friends, along with Arthur Laurents. Kelly Brown, Ross, Kaye, and Laurents all worked together in the Broadway musical I Can Get It for You Wholesale in 1962. In his autobiography, Laurents wrote that in the 1940s he had a sexual relationship with Nora Kaye.In 1965, an opportunity to run a dance studio opened up, and Kelly Brown decided to move his family to Phoenix, Arizona (changed to Oklahoma City in the film). By this time he and his wife had aged out of performing. Isabel Mirrow Brown was not thrilled to leave her native New York for Arizona, and the move caused strain in their marriage. When their daughter Leslie auditioned and was accepted to train back in New York in the School of American Ballet (SAB), Isabel moved back to New York to watch over Leslie, who was still a teenager. The film depicts Isabel's experience entering back into the dance world after living in Phoenix and having four children (three in the film). In real life she eventually divorced Kelly Brown, who died in 1981 at age 52.While in Arizona the Browns had kept in touch with their friends Nora and Herbert. Later in the mid 1970s, a script based on the Brown family was developed by Arthur Laurents. Ross directed the film and co-produced with his wife. Ross, Laurents, and Kaye never had children and took a special interest in Leslie Browne as she grew older.
The script was a fictionalized version of the Browns' life and the long friendship between Isabel and Nora. The fictional parts primarily concern the character Yuri, who was created as a love interest for Emilia. Originally, the ballerina Gelsey Kirkland, who was at the height of her fame at the time and dating Mikhail Baryshnikov (Yuri), was offered the role of Emilia. She rejected the role as she was dealing with substance abuse issues at the time and she "wanted no part of Hollywood". Ross then decided that Leslie Browne, who was nineteen at the time, would be able to portray a fictionalized version of herself in the film. In real life, Leslie had just joined ABT in 1976 and was experiencing the same things she portrayed on screen. Leslie had added an "e" to her last name as her stage name to sound more feminine after being mistaken as a man in a playbill.
The script changed the family name from Brown to Rodgers, and all the first names except for their son Ethan Brown. The real-life Ethan Brown later became a soloist with American Ballet Theatre, retiring from performing in 2004; he now teaches. In real life, the Browns had another son, Kelly Brown II, who danced as a child but did not train professionally like his siblings and later became a film producer. Their other daughter, Elizabeth Brown (born 1959), was also a dancer, unlike in the film, and was accepted into SAB a year after Leslie. Nora Kaye died of cancer in 1987 at age 67. After the film, Leslie Browne went on to become a principal dancer with American Ballet Theatre in New York City from 1986 until 1993 and now teaches ballet. Her mother Isabel continued to be associated with New York ballet and died in August 2014 at the age of 86.Herbert Ross later directed two more dance-themed films, Nijinsky (1980) and Dancers (1987), both of which also feature Leslie Browne.
Arthur Laurents claimed an important subplot regarding Wayne's homosexuality in the original script was cut from the film by Herbert Ross and his wife. This was the reason why Wayne's character's development does not progress steadily throughout the film.


== Reception ==
Vincent Canby of The New York Times called the film an "entertaining new movie, an old-fashioned backstage musical transplanted to the world of ballet by three people who not only know it but also love it, sentimental clichés and all." Arthur D. Murphy of Variety declared it "one of the best films of this era. It's that rare example of synergy in which every key element is excellent and the ensemble is an absolute triumph." Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and wrote, "In a movie year that will be remembered as the year of the science-fiction special effect, it is refreshing to see a film such as 'The Turning Point,' which offers another kind of excitement: the pleasure of following a story you can't easily anticipate." Charles Champlin of the Los Angeles Times stated, "The performances by Bancroft and MacLaine are stunning, and both are at Academy Award level ... 'The Turning Point' is a handsome, thoughtful, well-spoken and emotionally holding piece of stylish entertainment." Gary Arnold of The Washington Post called the film "enormously appealing" and "an authentic breakthrough-throwback: a vividly enacted depiction of the conflicts between strong, capable, conscious, willful women." Pauline Kael of The New Yorker wrote, "As a device, the turning point (like that synthetic summer when adolescent heroes grow into men) is so mechanical it's an exposed construction ... [Laurents] writes sodden, expository dialogue in which people are forever revealing truths to each other and then explaining those truths—'The Turning Point' comes with its own footnotes."On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 63% of 27 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.2/10. The website's consensus reads: "The Turning Point is a handsomely-made resuscitation of Old Hollywood melodramas with a compelling duo at its center, but the formulaic script keeps this story from realizing its symphonic potential." On Metacritic it has a score of 68% based on reviews from 10 critics.


== Accolades ==
The film was nominated for 11 Academy Awards, but failed to win any of them. Along with The Color Purple, it shares the record of receiving the most Oscar nominations without a single win.


== Appearances in popular culture ==
In an episode of The Nanny, Fran references the film by saying: "This is like that movie The Turning Point, only they were dancers and one was the mother and they were old friends... [looks confused] I should really rent that again."
In the Judy Blume book Summer Sisters this film sparked a great discussion with the two main characters of the story, Vix and Caitlin, which showed how different the girls' priorities were.
In the episode of That '70s Show entitled "Fez Dates Donna", Eric, much to his delight, could not take Donna out to see the movie since Donna was pretending to be dating Fez.
In an episode of Beverly Hills, 90210 ("Pass/Not Pass"), Brenda (Shannen Doherty) and Andrea (Gabrielle Carteris) perform a scene from the film for their theater class.
In the opening episode of Bunheads, Sutton Foster responds to hearing her mother-in-law's life story by saying "How very Turning Point."
The film is mentioned in the final episode of Feud: Bette & Joan ("You Mean All This Time We Could Have Been Friends?"); while attending the 1978 Academy Awards ceremony, Bette Davis (Susan Sarandon) praises the film to a bartender who asks her which of that year's "Best Picture" nominees she hopes wins. Davis speaks positively of the film and its feminist themes and calls the film (and Bancroft/MacLaine's rooftop fight) "the story of her life".


== References ==


== External links ==
The Turning Point at IMDb
The Turning Point at AllMovie12 Years a Slave (film)
1917 (2019 film)
1977 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards
20th Century Fox
30th Directors Guild of America Awards
30th Writers Guild of America Awards
32nd British Academy Film Awards
35th Golden Globe Awards
50th Academy Awards
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Most Violent Year
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Academy Awards
Albert Brenner
Alexandra Danilova
AllMovie
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Alvin Ailey
Amadeus (film)
American Ballet Theatre
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Cinema Editors
American Cinema Editors Award for Best Edited Feature Film – Dramatic
Anastasia (1956 film)
Anne Bancroft
Anne of the Thousand Days
Anthony Zerbe
Antoinette Sibley
Anyone Can Whistle
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arthur Laurents
Atonement (2007 film)
Audrey Hepburn
Avatar (2009 film)
BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role
Babel (film)
Barry Lyndon
Becket (1964 film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Betrayal (1983 film)
Beverly Hills, 90210
Bicycle Thieves
Birds of Paradise (musical)
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Bonjour Tristesse (1958 film)
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Boyhood (2014 film)
Boys on the Side
Brokeback Mountain
Bugsy
Bunheads
Cabaret (1972 film)
California Suite (film)
Caught (1949 film)
Chariots of Fire
Charles Champlin
Chicago Tribune
Chinatown (1974 film)
Citizen Kane
Confessions of a Nazi Spy
Da 5 Bloods
Dancers (film)
Dances with Wolves
David di Donatello
Days of Heaven
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Do I Hear a Waltz?
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Doris Day
Double entendre
Douglas Williams (sound engineer)
Drama (film and television)
Driving Miss Daisy
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
East of Eden (film)
Empire of the Sun (film)
Fandango Media
Far from the Madding Crowd (1967 film)
Feud (TV series)
Fiction
Finding Neverland (film)
Footloose (1984 film)
Forrest Gump
Funny Lady
Gabrielle Carteris
Gandhi (film)
Gelsey Kirkland
Gene Siskel
Gentleman's Agreement
George Balanchine
Gladiator (2000 film)
Gods and Monsters (film)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture
Golden Reel Award for Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing – Dialogue and ADR for Feature Film
Good Night, and Good Luck
Goodbye, Mr. Chips (1969 film)
Grace Kelly
Green Book (film)
Gypsy: A Musical Fable
Gypsy (musical)
Hallelujah, Baby!
Henry V (1944 film)
Her (film)
Herbert Ross
Home of the Brave (play)
Homosexuality
Howards End (film)
Hugo (film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
I Can Get It for You Wholesale
In Which We Serve
In the Heat of the Night (film)
Isabel Mirrow Brown
It Happened One Night
James Mitchell (actor)
Japan Academy Film Prize
Japan Academy Film Prize for Outstanding Foreign Language Film
Jerome Robbins
Jerry Jost
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Judy Blume
Julius Caesar (1953 film)
Kramer vs. Kramer
L.A. Confidential (film)
La Cage aux Folles (musical)
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Leslie Browne
Letters from Iwo Jima
Licorice Pizza
Lisa Lucas
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Director
Los Angeles Times
Love Story (1970 film)
Lucia Chase
Macbeth (1971 film)
Mad Max: Fury Road
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Marshall Thompson
Martha Scott
Marty (film)
Marvin March
Max Dugan Returns
Me and Juliet
Metacritic
Midnight Express (film)
Mikhail Baryshnikov
Mississippi Burning
Monsieur Verdoux
Moonlight (2016 film)
Motion Picture Sound Editors
Moulin Rouge!
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
My Blue Heaven (1990 American film)
Mystic River (film)
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Award for Best Actress
National Board of Review Award for Best Film
National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actor
National Board of Review Awards 1977
Neil Simon's I Ought to Be in Pictures
Nick & Nora (musical)
Night Must Fall (1937 film)
Nijinsky (film)
No Country for Old Men
Nomadland
None but the Lonely Heart (film)
Nora Kaye
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
Ordinary People
Out of Africa (film)
Paisan
Patton (film)
Paul Wells (sound engineer)
Pauline Kael
Pennies from Heaven (1981 film)
Phoenix, Arizona
Platoon (film)
Play It Again, Sam (film)
Pointe technique
Prima ballerina
Protocol (film)
Pulp Fiction
Question 7
Quills (film)
Rain Man
Reds (film)
Review aggregator
Robert Surtees (cinematographer)
Rocky
Rope (film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Saving Private Ryan
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
School of American Ballet
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Shannen Doherty
Shine (film)
Shirley MacLaine
Slumdog Millionaire
Sons and Lovers (film)
Spartacus (film)
Steel Magnolias
Summer Sisters
Sunset Boulevard (film)
T.R. Baskin
Terms of Endearment
That '70s Show
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Cardinal
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Conversation
The Defiant Ones
The Descendants
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story
The English Patient (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The French Connection (film)
The Godfather
The Goodbye Girl
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Hours (film)
The Informer (1935 film)
The Irishman
The Last Emperor
The Last of Sheila
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Madwoman of Central Park West
The Nanny (TV series)
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Nun's Story (film)
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Owl and the Pussycat (film)
The Ox-Bow Incident
The Pajama Game
The Post (film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Quiet Man
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Robe (film)
The Secret of My Success (1987 film)
The Seven-Per-Cent Solution (film)
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Social Network
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sting
The Sunshine Boys (1975 film)
The Time of the Cuckoo
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The True Glory
The Washington Post
The Way We Were
Theodore Soderberg (1923–2012)
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Titanic (1997 film)
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tom Skerritt
Top Gun: Maverick
Topaze (1933 American film)
True Colors (film)
Undercover Blues
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Variety (magazine)
Vincent Canby
West Side Story
William Reynolds (film editor)
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Original Screenplay
Zero Dark Thirty
http://www.the-numbers.com/movies/1977/0TRPN.php
http://www.criticaldance.com/interviews/2002/lesliebrowne020710.html
http://archives.danceviewtimes.com/2004/summer/01/abtrj3.htm
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1978
http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft0z09n7m0&chunk.id=d0e7170&toc.id=d0e7170&brand=ucpress
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/51265/The-Turning-Point/awards
http://www.richardcrouse.ca/hollywood-goes-dancing-with-the-stars-in-focus-by-richard-crouse-metro-canada-published-december-03-2010/
https://www.ibdb.com/broadway-production/i-can-get-it-for-you-wholesale-2773
http://people.com/archive/from-pain-and-emotional-turmoil-gelsey-kirkland-lights-up-the-ballet-stage-again-vol-7-no-8/
https://www.thefreelibrary.com/An+American+Dance+Dynasty.-a054783600
https://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/28/arts/dance/28old.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1981/03/21/obituaries/kelly-brown-actor-and-dancer-was-soloist-with-ballet-theater.html
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v51265
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076843/
https://www.nytimes.com/1999/01/03/magazine/the-lives-they-lived-jerome-robbins-dancing-outside-the-box.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1977/11/15/archives/turning-point-limns-ballet-life.html
https://books.google.com/books?id=rKxJiOAb6LAC&q=arthur+laurents+nora+kaye+relationship&pg=PA76
https://web.archive.org/web/20110316205106/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/51265/The-Turning-Point/awards
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/the-turning-point
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1022131-turning_point
