The Godfather
The Godfather is a 1972 American epic crime film directed by Francis Ford Coppola, who co-wrote the screenplay with Mario Puzo, based on Puzo's best-selling 1969 novel of the same title. The film stars Marlon Brando, Al Pacino, James Caan, Richard Castellano, Robert Duvall, Sterling Hayden, John Marley, Richard Conte and Diane Keaton. It is the first installment in The Godfather trilogy,  chronicling the Corleone family under patriarch Vito Corleone (Brando) from 1945 to 1955. It focuses on the transformation of his youngest son, Michael Corleone (Pacino), from reluctant family outsider to ruthless mafia boss.
Paramount Pictures obtained the rights to the novel for $80,000, before it gained popularity. Studio executives had trouble finding a director; the first few candidates turned down the position before Coppola signed on to direct the film but disagreement followed over casting several characters, in particular, Vito (Marlon Brando) and Michael (Al Pacino). Filming took place primarily on location around New York City and in Sicily, and was completed ahead of schedule. The musical score was composed principally by Nino Rota, with additional pieces by Carmine Coppola.
The Godfather premiered at the Loew's State Theatre on March 14, 1972, and was widely released in the United States on March 24, 1972. It was the highest-grossing film of 1972, and was for a time the highest-grossing film ever made, earning between $250 and $291 million at the box office. The film was well received by critics and audiences, who praised its performances—particularly those of Brando and Pacino—direction, screenplay, writing, story, cinematography, editing, score, and portrayal of the mafia. The Godfather launched the successful careers of Coppola, Pacino, and other relative newcomers in the cast and crew. At the 45th Academy Awards, the film won Best Picture, Best Actor (Brando), and Best Adapted Screenplay (for Puzo and Coppola). In addition, the seven other Oscar nominations included Pacino, Caan, and Duvall all for Best Supporting Actor, and Coppola for Best Director.
The Godfather is regarded as one of the greatest and most influential films ever made, as well as a landmark of the gangster genre. It was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry of the Library of Congress in 1990, being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and is ranked the second-greatest film in American cinema (behind Citizen Kane) by the American Film Institute. It was followed by sequels The Godfather Part II (1974) and The Godfather Part III (1990).


== Plot ==
In 1945, the New York City Corleone family don, Vito Corleone, listens to requests during his daughter Connie's wedding to Carlo. Vito's youngest son Michael, a former Marine who has thus far stayed out of the family business, introduces his girlfriend, Kay Adams, to his family at the reception. Johnny Fontane, a popular singer and Vito's godson, seeks Vito's help in securing a movie role. Vito sends his consigliere, Tom Hagen, to persuade studio president Jack Woltz to offer Johnny the part. Woltz refuses Hagen's request at first, but soon complies after finding the severed head of his prized racing horse in his bed.
As Christmas approaches, drug baron Sollozzo asks Vito to invest in his narcotics business and for police protection. Vito declines, citing that involvement in narcotics would alienate his political connections. Suspicious of Sollozzo's partnership with the Tattaglia crime family, Vito sends his enforcer Luca Brasi to the Tattaglias on an espionage mission. Brasi is garroted to death during the initial meeting. Later, enforcers gun down Vito and coerce Hagen into a meeting. With Vito's first-born Sonny now in command, Sollozzo pressures Hagen to persuade Sonny to accept the narcotics deal. Vito survives the shooting and is visited in the hospital by Michael, who finds him unprotected after NYPD officers on Sollozzo's payroll cleared out Vito's guards. Michael thwarts the attempt on his father's life but is beaten by corrupt police captain Mark McCluskey. After the attempted hit at the hospital, Sonny retaliates with a hit on Bruno Tattaglia. Sollozzo and McCluskey request to meet with Michael and settle the dispute. Michael feigns interest and agrees to meet, but hatches a plan with Sonny and Corleone capo Clemenza to kill them and go into hiding. Michael meets Sollozzo and McCluskey at a Bronx restaurant; after retrieving a handgun planted in the bathroom by Clemenza, he shoots both men dead.
Despite a clampdown by the authorities for the killing of a police captain, the Five Families erupt in open warfare. Michael takes refuge in Sicily and Fredo, Vito's second son, is sheltered by Moe Greene in Las Vegas. Sonny publicly attacks and threatens Carlo for physically abusing Connie. When he abuses her again, Sonny speeds to their home but is ambushed and murdered by gangsters at a highway toll booth. In Sicily, Michael meets and marries a local woman, Apollonia, but she is killed shortly thereafter by a car bomb intended for him.
Devastated by Sonny's death and tired of war, Vito sets a meeting with the Five Families. He assures them that he will withdraw his opposition to their narcotics business and forgo avenging Sonny's murder. His safety guaranteed, Michael returns home to enter the family business and marry Kay. Kay gives birth to two children in the early 1950s. With his father nearing the end of his life and Fredo not suited to lead, Michael assumes the position of head of the Corleone family. Vito reveals to Michael that it was Don Barzini who ordered the hit on Sonny and warns him that Barzini would try to kill him at a meeting organized by a traitorous Corleone capo. With Vito's support, Michael relegates Hagen to managing operations in Las Vegas as he is not a "wartime consigliere". Michael travels to Las Vegas to buy out Greene's stake in the family's casinos and is dismayed to see that Fredo is more loyal to Greene than to his own family.
In 1955, Vito dies of a heart attack while playing with Michael's son Anthony. At Vito's funeral, Tessio asks Michael to meet with Barzini, signaling his betrayal. The meeting is set for the same day as the baptism of Connie's baby. While Michael stands at the altar as the child's godfather, Corleone hitmen murder the dons of the Five Families, plus Greene, and Tessio is executed for his treachery. Michael extracts Carlo's confession to playing a part in Sonny's murder. He assures Carlo that he is being exiled, not murdered, before Clemenza strangles Carlo. Connie confronts Michael about his involvement in Carlo's death while Kay is in the room. Kay asks Michael if she is telling the truth and is relieved when he denies carrying out the death. As she leaves, capos enter the office and pay reverence to Michael as "Don Corleone".


== Cast ==

Other actors playing smaller roles in the Sicilian sequence are Simonetta Stefanelli as Apollonia Vitelli-Corleone, Angelo Infanti as Fabrizio, Corrado Gaipa as Don Tommasino, Franco Citti as Calò and Saro Urzì as Vitelli.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
The film is based on Mario Puzo's The Godfather, which remained on The New York Times Best Seller list for 67 weeks and sold over nine million copies in two years. Published in 1969, it became the best selling published work in history for several years. Burt Lancaster and Danny Thomas both expressed interest adopting the book. Paramount Pictures originally found out about Puzo's novel in 1967 when a literary scout for the company contacted then Paramount Vice President of Production Peter Bart about Puzo's unfinished sixty-page manuscript titled Mafia. Bart believed the work was "much beyond a Mafia story" and offered Puzo a $12,500 option for the work, with an option for $80,000 if the finished work were to be made into a film. Despite Puzo's agent telling him to turn down the offer, Puzo was desperate for money and accepted the deal. Paramount's Robert Evans relates that, when they met in early 1968, he offered Puzo the deal after the author confided in him that he urgently needed $10,000 to pay off gambling debts.In March 1967, Paramount announced that they backed Puzo's upcoming work in the hopes of making a film. In 1969, Paramount confirmed their intentions to make a film out of the novel for the price of $80,000, with aims to have the film released on Christmas Day in 1971. On March 23, 1970, Albert S. Ruddy was officially announced as the film's producer, in part because studio executives were impressed with his interview and because he was known for bringing his films in under budget.


=== Direction ===
Evans wanted the picture to be directed by an Italian American to make the film "ethnic to the core". Paramount's latest mafia movie, The Brotherhood, had done very poorly at the box office; Evans believed that the reason for its failure was its almost complete lack of cast members or creative personnel of Italian descent (the director Martin Ritt and star Kirk Douglas were not Italian). Sergio Leone was Paramount's first choice to direct the film. Leone turned down the option, in order to work on his own gangster film Once Upon a Time in America. Peter Bogdanovich was then approached but he also declined the offer because he was not interested in the mafia. In addition, Peter Yates, Richard Brooks, Arthur Penn, Franklin J. Schaffner, Costa-Gavras, and Otto Preminger were all offered the position and declined. Evans' chief assistant Peter Bart suggested Francis Ford Coppola, as a director of Italian ancestry who would work for a low sum and budget after the poor reception of his latest film The Rain People. Coppola initially turned down the job because he found Puzo's novel sleazy and sensationalist, describing it as "pretty cheap stuff". At the time Coppola's studio, American Zoetrope, owed over $400,000 to Warner Bros. for budget overruns with the film THX 1138 and when coupled with his poor financial standing, along with advice from friends and family, Coppola reversed his initial decision and took the job. Coppola was officially announced as director of the film on September 28, 1970.  Coppola agreed to receive $125,000 and six percent of the gross rentals. Coppola later found a deeper theme for the material and decided that the film should not be about organized crime but a family chronicle, a metaphor for capitalism in America.


==== Coppola and Paramount ====
Before The Godfather was in production, Paramount had been going through an unsuccessful period. In addition to the failure of The Brotherhood, other recent films that were produced or co-produced by Paramount had greatly exceeded their budgets: Darling Lili, Paint Your Wagon, and Waterloo. The budget for the film was originally $2.5 million but as the book grew in popularity Coppola argued for and ultimately received a larger budget. Paramount executives wanted the movie to be set in contemporary Kansas City and shot in the studio backlot in order to cut down on costs. Coppola objected and wanted to set the movie in the same time period as the novel, the 1940s and 1950s; Coppola's reasons included: Michael Corleone's Marine Corps stint, the emergence of corporate America, and America in the years after World War II. The novel was becoming increasingly successful and so Coppola's wishes were eventually granted. The studio heads subsequently let Coppola film on location in New York City and Sicily.Gulf+Western executive Charles Bluhdorn was frustrated with Coppola over the number of screen tests he had performed without finding a person to play the various roles. Production quickly fell behind because of Coppola's indecisiveness and conflicts with Paramount, which led to costs being around $40,000 per day. With costs rising, Paramount had then-Vice President Jack Ballard keep a close eye on production expenses. While filming, Coppola stated that he felt he could be fired at any point as he knew Paramount executives were not happy with many of the decisions he had made. Coppola was aware that Evans had asked Elia Kazan to take over directing the film because he feared that Coppola was too inexperienced to cope with the increased size of the production. Coppola was also convinced that the film editor, Aram Avakian, and the assistant director, Steve Kestner, were conspiring to get him fired. Avakian complained to Evans that he could not edit the scenes correctly because Coppola was not shooting enough footage. Evans was satisfied with the footage being sent to the West Coast and authorized Coppola to fire them both. Coppola later explained: "Like the godfather, I fired people as a preemptory strike. The people who were angling the most to have me fired, I had fired." Brando threatened to quit if Coppola was fired.Paramount wanted The Godfather to appeal to a wide audience and threatened Coppola with a "violence coach" to make the film more exciting. Coppola added a few more violent scenes to keep the studio happy. The scene in which Connie smashes crockery after finding out Carlo has been cheating was added for this reason.


=== Writing ===
On April 14, 1970, it was revealed that Puzo was hired by Paramount for $100,000, along with a percentage of the film's profits, to work on the screenplay for the film. Working from the book, Coppola wanted to have the themes of culture, character, power, and family at the forefront of the film, whereas Puzo wanted to retain aspects from his novel and his initial draft of 150 pages was finished on August 10, 1970. After Coppola was hired as director, both Puzo and Coppola worked on the screenplay, but separately. Puzo worked on his draft in Los Angeles, while Coppola wrote his version in San Francisco. Coppola created a book where he tore pages out of Puzo's book and pasted them into his book. There, he made notes about each of the book's fifty scenes, which related to major themes prevalent in the scene, whether the scene should be included in the film, along with ideas and concepts that could be used when filming to make the film true to Italian culture. The two remained in contact while they wrote their respective screenplays and made decisions on what to include and what to remove for the final version. A second draft was completed on March 1, 1971, and was 173 pages long. The final screenplay was finished on March 29, 1971, and wound up being 163 pages long, 40 pages over what Paramount had asked for. When filming, Coppola referred to the notebook he had created over the final draft of the screenplay. Screenwriter Robert Towne did uncredited work on the script, particularly on the Pacino-Brando garden scene. Despite finishing the third draft, some scenes in the film were still not written yet and were written during production.The Italian-American Civil Rights League, led by mobster Joseph Colombo, maintained that the film emphasized stereotypes about Italian-Americans, and wanted all uses of the words "mafia" and "Cosa Nostra" to be removed from the script. The league also requested that all the money earned from the premiere be donated to the league's fund to build a new hospital. Coppola claimed that Puzo's screenplay only contained two instances of the word "mafia" being used, while "Cosa Nostra" was not used at all. They were removed and replaced with other terms, without compromising the story. The league eventually gave its support for the script. Earlier, the windows of producer Albert S. Ruddy's car had been shot out with a note left on the dashboard which essentially said, "shut down the movie—or else."


=== Casting ===

Puzo was first to show interest in having Marlon Brando portray Don Vito Corleone by sending a letter to Brando in which he stated Brando was the "only actor who can play the Godfather". Despite Puzo's wishes, the executives at Paramount were against having Brando, partly because of the poor performance of his recent films and also his short temper. Coppola favored Brando or Laurence Olivier for the role, but Olivier's agent refused the role claiming Olivier was sick; however, Olivier went on to star in Sleuth later that year. The studio mainly pushed for Ernest Borgnine to receive the part. Others considered were George C. Scott, Richard Conte, Anthony Quinn and Orson Welles. Welles was Paramount's preferred choice for the role.After months of debate between Coppola and Paramount over Brando, the two finalists for the role were Borgnine and Brando,; Paramount president Stanley Jaffe required Brando to perform a screen test. Coppola did not want to offend Brando and stated that he needed to test equipment in order to set up the screen test at Brando's California residence. For make-up, Brando stuck cotton balls in his cheeks, put shoe polish in his hair to darken it, and rolled his collar. Coppola placed Brando's audition tape in the middle of the videos of the audition tapes as the Paramount executives watched them. The executives were impressed with Brando's efforts and allowed Coppola to cast Brando for the role if Brando accepted a lower salary and put up a bond to ensure he would not cause any delays in production. Brando earned $1.6 million from a net participation deal.From the start of production, Coppola wanted Robert Duvall to play the part of Tom Hagen. After screen testing several other actors, Coppola eventually got his wish and Duvall was awarded the part. Al Martino, a then famed singer in nightclubs, was notified of the character Johnny Fontane by a friend who read the novel and felt Martino represented the character of Johnny Fontane. Martino then contacted producer Albert S. Ruddy, who gave him the part. However, Martino was stripped of the part after Coppola became director and then awarded the role to singer Vic Damone. According to Martino, after being stripped of the role, he went to Russell Bufalino, his godfather and a crime boss, who then orchestrated the publication of various news articles that claimed Coppola was unaware of Ruddy giving Martino the part. Damone eventually dropped the role because he did not want to provoke the mob, in addition to being paid too little. Ultimately, the part of Johnny Fontane was given to Martino.Coppola cast Diane Keaton for the role of Kay Adams owing to her reputation for being eccentric. John Cazale was given the part of Fredo Corleone after Coppola saw him perform in an Off Broadway production. Gianni Russo was given the role of Carlo Rizzi after he was asked to perform a screen test in which he acted out the fight between Rizzi and Connie.Nearing the start of filming on March 29, Michael Corleone had yet to be cast. Paramount executives wanted a popular actor, either Warren Beatty or Robert Redford. Producer Robert Evans wanted Ryan O'Neal to receive the role, owing in part to his recent success in Love Story. Pacino was Coppola's favorite for the role as he could picture him roaming the Sicilian countryside, and wanted an unknown actor who looked like an Italian-American. However, Paramount executives found Pacino to be too short to play Michael. Dustin Hoffman, Martin Sheen, Dean Stockwell,  and James Caan also auditioned. Burt Reynolds was offered the role of Michael, but Marlon Brando threatened to quit if Reynolds was hired, so Reynolds turned down the role. Jack Nicholson was also offered the role, but turned it down as he felt that an Italian-American actor should play the role. Caan was well received by the Paramount executives and was given the part of Michael initially, while the role of Sonny Corleone was awarded to Carmine Caridi. Coppola still pushed for Pacino to play Michael after the fact and Evans eventually conceded, allowing Pacino to have the role of Michael as long as Caan played Sonny. Evans preferred Caan over Caridi because Caan was seven inches shorter than Caridi, which was much closer to Pacino's height. Despite agreeing to play Michael Corleone, Pacino was contracted to star in MGM's The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight, but the two studios agreed on a settlement and Pacino was signed by Paramount three weeks before shooting began.Robert De Niro originally was given the part of Paulie Gatto. A spot in The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight opened up after Al Pacino quit the project in favor of The Godfather, which led De Niro to audition for the role and leave The Godfather after receiving the part. After De Niro quit, Johnny Martino was given the role of Gatto.Coppola gave several roles in the film to family members. He gave his sister, Talia Shire, the role of Connie Corleone. His daughter Sofia, then an infant, appeared as Michael Francis Rizzi, Connie's and Carlo's newborn son. Carmine Coppola, his father, appeared in the film as an extra playing a piano during a scene. Coppola's wife, mother, and two sons all appeared as extras in the picture.Several smaller roles, like Luca Brasi, were cast after the filming had started.


=== Filming ===
Before the filming began, the cast received a two-week period for rehearsal, which included a dinner where each actor and actress had to assume character for its duration. Filming was scheduled to begin on March 29, 1971, with the scene between Michael Corleone and Kay Adams as they leave Best & Co. in New York City after shopping for Christmas gifts. The weather on March 23 predicted snow flurries, which caused Ruddy to move the filming date forward; snow did not materialize and a snow machine was used. Principal filming in New York continued until July 2, 1971. Coppola asked for a three-week break before heading overseas to film in Sicily. Following the crew's departure for Sicily, Paramount announced that the release date would be moved to early 1972.
Cinematographer Gordon Willis initially turned down the opportunity to film The Godfather because the production seemed "chaotic" to him. After Willis later accepted the offer, he and Coppola agreed to not use any modern filming devices, helicopters, or zoom lenses. Willis and Coppola chose to use a "tableau format" of filming to make it seem as if it was viewed like a painting. He made use of shadows and low light levels throughout the film to showcase psychological developments. Willis and Coppola agreed to interplay light and dark scenes throughout the film. Willis underexposed the film in order to create a "yellow tone". The scenes in Sicily were shot to display the countryside and "display a more romantic land," giving these scenes a "softer, more romantic" feel than the New York scenes.
One of the film's most shocking moments involved an actual severed horse's head. The filming location for this scene is contested, as some sources indicate it was filmed at the Beverly Estate, while others indicate it was filmed at Sands Point Preserve on Long Island. Coppola received some criticism for the scene, although the head was obtained from a dog-food company from a horse that was to be killed regardless of the film.  On June 22, the scene where Sonny is killed was shot on a runway at Mitchel Field in Uniondale, where three tollbooths were built, along with guard rails, and billboards to set the scene. Sonny's car was a 1941 Lincoln Continental with holes drilled in it to resemble bullet holes. The scene took three days to film and cost over $100,000.Coppola's request to film on location was observed; approximately 90 percent was shot in New York City and its surrounding suburbs, using over 120 distinct locations. Several scenes were filmed at Filmways in East Harlem. The remaining portions were filmed in California, or on-site in Sicily. The scenes set in Las Vegas were not shot on location because there were insufficient funds. Savoca and Forza d'Agrò were the Sicilian towns featured in the film. The opening wedding scene was shot in a Staten Island neighborhood using almost 750 locals as extras. The house used as the Corleone household and the wedding location was at 110 Longfellow Avenue in the Todt Hill neighborhood of Staten Island. The wall around the Corleone compound was made from styrofoam. Scenes set in and around the Corleone olive oil business were filmed on Mott Street.After filming had ended on August 7, post-production efforts were focused on trimming the film to a manageable length. In addition, producers and director were still including and removing different scenes from the end product, along with trimming certain sequences. In September, the first rough cut of the film was viewed. Many of the scenes removed from the film were centered around Sonny, which did not advance the plot. By November, Coppola and Ruddy finished the semi-final cut. Debates over personnel involved with the final editing remained even 25 years after the release of the film. The film was shown to Paramount staff and exhibitors in late December 1971 and January 1972.


== Music ==

Coppola hired Italian composer Nino Rota to create the underscore for the film, including "Love Theme from The Godfather". For the score, Rota was to relate to the situations and characters in the film. Rota synthesized new music for the film and took some parts from his 1958 Fortunella film score, in order to create an Italian feel and evoke the tragedy within the film. Paramount executive Evans found the score to be too "highbrow" and did not want to use it; however, it was used after Coppola managed to get Evans to agree. Coppola believed that Rota's musical piece gave the film even more of an Italian feel. Coppola's father, Carmine, created some additional music for the film, particularly the music played by the band during the opening wedding scene.Incidental music includes "C'è la luna mezzo mare" and Cherubino's aria, "Non so più cosa son", from Le Nozze di Figaro. There was a soundtrack released for the film in 1972 in vinyl form by Paramount Records, on CD in 1991 by Geffen Records, and digitally by Geffen on August 18, 2005. The album contains over 31 minutes of music that was used in the film, most of which was composed by Rota, along with a song from Coppola and one by Johnny Farrow and Marty Symes. AllMusic gave the album five out of five, with editor Zach Curd saying it is a "dark, looming, and elegant soundtrack". An editor for Filmtracks believed that Rota was successful in relating the music to the film's core aspects.


== Release ==


=== Theatrical ===
The world premiere for The Godfather took place at Loews's State Theatre in New York City on Tuesday, March 14, 1972, almost three months after the planned release date of Christmas Day in 1971, with profits from the premiere donated to The Boys Club of New York. Before the film premiered, the film had already made $15 million from advance rentals from over 400 theaters. The following day, the film opened in five theaters in New York (Loew's State I and II, Orpheum, Cine and Tower East). Next was the Imperial Theatre in Toronto on March 17 and then Los Angeles at two theaters on March 22. The Godfather was released on March 24, 1972, throughout the rest of the United States reaching 316 theaters five days later.


=== Home media ===
The television rights were sold for a record $10 million to NBC for one showing over two nights. The theatrical version of The Godfather debuted on American network television on NBC with only minor edits. The first half of the film aired on Saturday, November 16, 1974, and the second half two days later. The television airings attracted a large audience with an average Nielsen rating of 38.2 and audience share of 59% making it the eighth most-watched film on television, with the broadcast of the second half getting the third-best rating for a film on TV behind Airport and Love Story with a rating of 39.4 and 57% share. The broadcast helped generate anticipation for the upcoming sequel. The next year, Coppola created The Godfather Saga expressly for American television in a release that combined The Godfather and The Godfather Part II with unused footage from those two films in a chronological telling that toned down the violent, sexual, and profane material for its NBC debut on November 18, 1977. In 1981, Paramount released the Godfather Epic boxed set, which also told the story of the first two films in chronological order, again with additional scenes, but not redacted for broadcast sensibilities. The Godfather Trilogy was released in 1992, in which the films are fundamentally in chronological order.The Godfather Family: A Look Inside was a 73-minute documentary released in 1991. Directed by Jeff Warner, the film featured some behind the scenes content from all three films, interviews with the actors, and screen tests. The Godfather DVD Collection was released on October 9, 2001, in a package that contained all three films—each with a commentary track by Coppola—and a bonus disc containing The Godfather Family: A Look Inside. The DVD also held a Corleone family tree, a "Godfather" timeline, and footage of the Academy Award acceptance speeches.


==== The Godfather: The Coppola Restoration ====
During the film's original theatrical release, the original negatives were worn down due to the reel being printed so much to meet demand. In addition, the duplicate negative was lost in Paramount archives. In 2006 Coppola contacted Steven Spielberg—whose studio DreamWorks had recently been bought out by Paramount—about restoring The Godfather. Robert A. Harris was hired to oversee the restoration of The Godfather and its two sequels, with the film's cinematographer Willis participating in the restoration. Work began in November 2006 by repairing the negatives so they could go through a digital scanner to produce high resolution 4K files. If a negative were damaged and discolored, work was done digitally to restore it to its original look. After a year and a half of working on the restoration, the project was complete. Paramount called the finished product The Godfather: The Coppola Restoration and released it to the public on September 23, 2008, on both DVD and Blu-ray Disc. Dave Kehr of The New York Times believed the restoration brought back the "golden glow of their original theatrical screenings". As a whole, the restoration of the film was well received by critics and Coppola. The Godfather: The Coppola Restoration contains several new special features that play in high definition, (including additional scenes, behind the scenes footage, etc.).Paramount Pictures restored and remastered The Godfather, The Godfather Part II, and The Godfather Coda: The Death of Michael Corleone (a re-edited cut of the third film) for a limited theatrical run and home media release on Blu-ray and 4K Blu-ray to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the premiere of The Godfather. The disc editions were released on March 22, 2022.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The Godfather was a blockbuster, breaking many box office records to become the highest grossing film of 1972. The film's opening day gross from five theaters was $57,829 with ticket prices increased from $3 to $3.50. Prices in New York increased further at the weekend to $4, and the number of showings increased from four times a day to seven times a day. The film grossed $61,615 in Toronto for the weekend and $240,780 in New York, for an opening weekend gross of $302,395. The film grossed $454,000 for the week in New York and $115,000 in Toronto for a first week gross of $568,800, which made it number one at the U.S. box office for the week. In its first five days of national release, it grossed $6.8 million, taking its gross up to $7,397,164. A week later its gross had reached $17,291,705 with the one week gross of around $10 million being an industry record. It grossed another $8.7 million by April 9 to take its gross to $26,000,815. After 18 weeks at number one in the United States, the film had grossed $101 million, the fastest film to reach that milestone. Some news articles at the time proclaimed it was the first film to gross $100 million in North America, but such accounts are erroneous; this record belongs to The Sound of Music, released in 1965. It remained at number one in the US for another five weeks to bring its total to 23 consecutive weeks at number one before being unseated by Butterflies Are Free for one week before becoming number one for another three weeks.The film eventually earned $81.5 million in theatrical rentals in the US and Canada during its initial release, increasing its earnings to $85.7 million through a reissue in 1973, and including a limited re-release in 1997, it ultimately earned an equivalent exhibition gross of $135 million, with a production cost of $6.5 million. It displaced Gone with the Wind to claim the record as the top rentals earner, a position it would retain until the release of Jaws in 1975. The film repeated its native success overseas, earning in total an unprecedented $142 million in worldwide theatrical rentals, to become the highest net earner. Profits were so high for The Godfather that earnings for Gulf & Western Industries, Inc., which owned Paramount, jumped from 77 cents per share to $3.30 a share for the year, according to a Los Angeles Times article, dated December 13, 1972. Re-released eight more times since 1997, it has grossed between $250 million and $291 million in worldwide box office receipts, and adjusted for ticket price inflation in North America, ranks among the top 25 highest-grossing films.


=== Critical response ===
The Godfather has received overwhelming critical acclaim and is seen as one of the greatest and most influential films of all time, particularly of the gangster genre. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 97% approval rating based on 151 reviews, with an average rating of 9.4/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "One of Hollywood's greatest critical and commercial successes, The Godfather gets everything right; not only did the movie transcend expectations, it established new benchmarks for American cinema." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, has assigned the film a score of 100 out of 100 based on 16 critic reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". On "Filmweb", a Polish review site, it received a 8.9 out of 10 based on 35 critic reviews.Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun Times praised Coppola's efforts to follow the storyline of the novel, the choice to set the film in the same time as the novel, and the film's ability to "absorb" the viewer over its three-hour run time. Ebert named The Godfather "The best film of 1972". The Chicago Tribune's Gene Siskel gave the film four out of four, commenting that it was "very good".The Village Voice's Andrew Sarris believed Brando portrayed Vito Corleone well and that his character dominated each scene it appeared in, but felt Puzo and Coppola had the character of Michael Corleone too focused on revenge. In addition, Sarris stated that Richard Castellano, Robert Duvall, and James Caan were good in their respective roles. Pauline Kael of The New Yorker wrote "If ever there was a great example of how the best popular movies come out of a merger of commerce and art, “The Godfather” is it."Desson Howe of The Washington Post called the film a "jewel" and wrote that Coppola deserves most of the credit for the film. Writing for The New York Times, Vincent Canby felt that Coppola had created one of the "most brutal and moving chronicles of American life" and went on to say that it "transcends its immediate milieu and genre". Director Stanley Kubrick thought the film had the best cast ever and could be the best movie ever made. Director Steven Spielberg listed it among his favorite films. Stanley Kauffmann of The New Republic wrote negatively of the film in a contemporary review, claiming that Pacino "rattles around in a part too demanding for him," while also criticizing Brando's make-up and Rota's score.Previous mafia films had looked at the gangs from the perspective of an outraged outsider. In contrast, The Godfather presents the gangster's perspective of the Mafia as a response to corrupt society. Although the Corleone family is presented as immensely rich and powerful, no scenes depict prostitution, gambling, loan sharking or other forms of racketeering. George De Stefano argues that the setting of a criminal counterculture allows for unapologetic gender stereotyping (such as when Vito tells a weepy Johnny Fontane to "act like a man") and is an important part of the film's appeal.Remarking on the fortieth anniversary of the film's release, film critic John Podhoretz praised The Godfather as "arguably the great American work of popular art" and "the summa of all great moviemaking before it". Two years before, Roger Ebert had written in his journal that it "comes closest to being a film everyone agrees ... is unquestionably great".


== Accolades ==

The Godfather was nominated for seven awards at the 30th Golden Globe Awards: Best Picture – Drama, James Caan for Best Supporting Actor, Al Pacino and Marlon Brando for Best Actor – Drama, Best Score, Best Director, and Best Screenplay. When the winners were announced on January 28, 1973, the film had won the categories for: Best Screenplay, Best Director, Best Actor – Drama (Brando), Best Original Score, and Best Picture – Drama.Rota's score was also nominated for Grammy Award for Best Original Score for a Motion Picture or TV Special at the 15th Grammy Awards. Rota was announced the winner of the category on March 3 at the Grammys' ceremony in Nashville, Tennessee.When the nominations for the 45th Academy Awards were revealed on February 12, 1973, The Godfather was nominated for eleven awards. The nominations were for: Best Picture, Best Costume Design, Marlon Brando for Best Actor, Mario Puzo and Francis Ford Coppola for Best Adapted Screenplay, Pacino, Caan, and Robert Duvall for Best Supporting Actor, Best Film Editing, Nino Rota for Best Original Score, Coppola for Best Director, and Best Sound. Upon further review of Rota's love theme from The Godfather, the academy found that Rota had used a similar score in Eduardo De Filippo's 1958 comedy Fortunella. This led to re-balloting, where members of the music branch chose from six films: The Godfather and the five films that had been on the shortlist for best original dramatic score but did not get nominated. John Addison's score for Sleuth won this new vote, and thus replaced Rota's score on the official list of nominees. Going into the awards ceremony, The Godfather was seen as the favorite to take home the most awards. From the nominations that The Godfather had remaining, it only won three of the Academy Awards: Best Actor for Brando, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Picture.Brando, who had also not attended the Golden Globes ceremony two months earlier, boycotted the Academy Awards ceremony and refused to accept the Oscar, becoming the second actor to refuse a Best Actor award after George C. Scott in 1970. Brando sent American Indian Rights activist Sacheen Littlefeather in his place, to announce at the awards podium Brando's reasons for declining the award, which were based on his objection to the depiction of American Indians by Hollywood and television. Pacino also boycotted the ceremony; he was insulted at being nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, when he had more screen time than his co-star and Best Actor-winner Brando, and thus should have received the nomination for Best Actor.The Godfather had five nominations for awards at the 26th British Academy Film Awards. The nominees were: Pacino for Most Promising Newcomer, Rota for the Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music, Duvall for Best Supporting Actor, and Brando for Best Actor, the film's costume designer Anna Hill Johnstone for Best Costume Design. The only nomination to win was that of Rota.


=== List of accolades ===


== Recognition ==


=== American Film Institute ===
1998 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies – No. 3
2001 AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills – No. 11
2005 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
"I'm going to make him an offer he can't refuse." – No. 2
2006 AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores – No. 5
2007 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – No. 2
2008 AFI's 10 Top 10 – No. 1 Gangster Film


=== Others ===
1990 Selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
1992 The Godfather ranked 6th in Sight & Sound Greatest Films of All Time director's poll.
1998 Time Out conducted a poll and The Godfather was voted the best film of all time.
The Village Voice ranked The Godfather at number 12 in its Top 250 "Best Films of the Century" list in 1999, based on a poll of critics.
1999 Entertainment Weekly named it the greatest film ever made.
2002 Sight & Sound polled film directors and they voted the film and its sequel as the second best film ever; the critics poll separately voted it fourth.
2002 The Godfather was ranked the second best film of all time by Film4, after Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back.
2002 The film (along with The Godfather Part II) was voted at No. 39 on the list of the "Top 100 Essential Films of All Time" by the National Society of Film Critics.
2005 Named one of the 100 greatest films of the last 80 years by Time magazine (the selected films were not ranked).
2006 The Writers Guild of America, West agreed, voting it the number two in its list of the 101 greatest screenplays, after Casablanca.
2008 Voted in at No. 1 on Empire magazine's list of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time.
2008 Voted at No. 50 on the list of "100 Greatest Films" by the prominent French magazine Cahiers du cinéma.
2009 The Godfather was ranked at No. 1 on Japanese film magazine kinema Junpo's Top 10 Non-Japanese Films of All Time list.
2010 The Guardian ranked the film 15th in its list of 25 greatest arthouse films.
2012 The Motion Picture Editors Guild listed The Godfather as the sixth best-edited film of all time based on a survey of its membership.
2012 The film ranked at number seven on Sight & Sound directors' top ten poll. On the same list it was ranked at number twenty one by critics.
2014 The Godfather was voted the greatest film in a Hollywood Reporter poll of 2120 industry members, including every studio, agency, publicity firm and production house in Hollywood in 2014.
2015 Second on the BBC's "100 Greatest American Films", voted by film critics from around the world.


== Cultural influence and legacy ==
Although many films about gangsters preceded The Godfather, Coppola steeped his film in Italian immigrant culture, and his portrayal of mobsters as persons of considerable psychological depth and complexity was unprecedented. Coppola took it further with The Godfather Part II, and the success of those two films, critically, artistically and financially, was a catalyst for the production of numerous other depictions of Italian Americans as mobsters, including films such as Martin Scorsese's Goodfellas and TV series such as David Chase's The Sopranos.
A comprehensive study of Italian-American culture in film from 1914 to 2014 was conducted by the Italic Institute of America showing the influence of The Godfather. Over 81 percent of films, 430 films, featuring Italian Americans as mobsters (87 percent of which were fictional) had been produced since The Godfather, an average of 10 per year, while only 98 films were produced preceding The Godfather.
The Godfather epic, encompassing the original trilogy and the additional footage that Coppola incorporated later, has been thoroughly integrated into American life. Together with a succession of mob-theme imitators, it has resulted in a stereotyped concept of Italian-American culture biased toward the criminal networks. The first film had the largest effect. Unlike any film before it, its portrayal of the many poor Italians who immigrated to the United States in the early decades of the 20th century is perhaps attributable to Coppola and expresses his understanding of their experience. The films explore the integration of fictional Italian-American criminals into American society. Though set in the period of mass Italian immigration to America, the film explores the specific family of the Corleones, who live outside the law. Although some critics have considered the Corleone story to portray some universal elements of immigration, other critics have suggested that it resulted in viewers overly associating organized crime with Italian-American culture. Produced in a period of intense national cynicism and self-criticism, the film struck a chord about the dual identities felt by many descendants of immigrants. The Godfather has been cited as an influence in an increase in Hollywood's negative portrayals of immigrant Italians, and was a recruiting tool for organized crime.The concept of a mafia "Godfather" was a creation of Mario Puzo, and the film resulted in this term being added to the common language. Don Vito Corleone's line, "I'm gonna make him an offer he can't refuse", was voted the second-most memorable line in cinema history in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes by the American Film Institute, in 2014. The concept was not unique to the film. French writer Honoré de Balzac, in his novel Le Père Goriot (1835), wrote that Vautrin told Eugène: "In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline." An almost identical line was used in the John Wayne Western, Riders of Destiny (1933), where Forrest Taylor states, "I've made Denton an offer he can't refuse." In 2014, the film also was selected as the greatest film by 2,120 industry professionals in a Hollywood survey undertaken by The Hollywood Reporter.Gangsters reportedly responded enthusiastically to the film. Salvatore "Sammy the Bull" Gravano, the former underboss in the Gambino crime family, said: "I left the movie stunned ... I mean I floated out of the theater. Maybe it was fiction, but for me, then, that was our life. It was incredible. I remember talking to a multitude of guys, made guys, who felt exactly the same way." According to Anthony Fiato, after seeing the film, Patriarca crime family members Paulie Intiso and Nicky Giso altered their speech patterns to imitate that of Vito Corleone. Intiso was known to swear frequently and use poor grammar; but after seeing the movie, he began to improve his speech and philosophize more.


== Representation in other media ==
The film has been referenced and parodied in various kinds of media.
John Belushi appeared in a Saturday Night Live sketch as Vito Corleone in a therapy session; he said of the Tattaglia Family, "Also, they shot my son Santino 56 times".
In the television show The Sopranos, Silvio Dante's topless bar is named Bada Bing!, a phrase popularized by James Caan's character Sonny Corleone in The Godfather.
In the animated television series The Simpsons, there have been many references to the film. For instance, in the season 3 episode "Lisa's Pony", Lisa wakes up to find a horse in her bed and starts screaming, a reference to Jack finding his prize racehorse's head in his bed. In the season 4 episode "Mr. Plow", Bart Simpson is pelted with snowballs in mimicry of Sonny's killing.
The film's baptism sequence was parodied in "Fulgencio", the 13th episode of season 4 of the comedy series Modern Family, with Phil Dunphy standing in for Michael. The sequence also references the horse head scene when Phil's son Luke places a severed zebra head in the bed of a boy who had been making fun of him and had a fear of zebras. Phil also references Godfather lines when he tells his wife Claire, "Don't ask me about my business," and mentions an offer he can't refuse.
The 2006 video game The Godfather is based upon this film and tells the story of an original character, Aldo Trapani, whose rise through the ranks of the Corleone family intersects with the plot of the film on numerous occasions. Duvall, Caan, and Brando supplied voiceovers and their likenesses, but Pacino did not. Francis Ford Coppola openly voiced his disapproval of the game.
On April 28, 2022, a 10-episode drama series The Offer premiered on Paramount+, about the production told from the perspective of producer Ruddy.
An episode of the animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants entitled “The Goobfather” from the 13th season has many scenes that directly parody this film.
The 2023 film Barbie, directed by Greta Gerwig, features a scene in which the characters watch The Godfather, with Ken, portrayed by Kingsley Ben-Adir, praising the film as a collective effort of Francis Ford Coppola and Robert Evans. A clip from The Godfather is also shown, showing Marlon Brando in the opening scene of the film.


== See also ==
List of films set in Las Vegas


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==


== External links ==

Official website 
The Godfather at IMDb 
The Godfather at the American Film Institute Catalog 
The Godfather at Box Office Mojo 
The Godfather at Rotten Tomatoes 
The Godfather at Metacritic 
The Godfather essay by Michael Sragow on the National Film Registry website12 Years a Slave (film)
15th Grammy Awards
1917 (2019 film)
1972 in film
2001: A Space Odyssey (film)
25th Directors Guild of America Awards
25th Writers Guild of America Awards
26th British Academy Film Awards
30th Golden Globe Awards
43rd Academy Awards
45th Academy Awards
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)
AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills
AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores
AFI's 10 Top 10
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
AMC (TV channel)
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Heart in Winter
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Separation
Abe Vigoda
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Costume Design
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Airport (1970 film)
Al Lettieri
Al Martino
Al Neri
Al Pacino
Albert S. Ruddy
Albert Volpe
Alex Rocco
Alien (franchise)
AllMusic
All About Eve
All About My Mother
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Film Institute
American Graffiti
American Zoetrope
Amerigo Bonasera
An American in Paris (film)
Andrew Sarris
Angelo Infanti
Animated television series
Anna Hill Johnstone
Anne of the Thousand Days
Annie Hall
Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music
Anthony Corleone
Anthony Fiato
Anthony Quinn
Apocalypse Now
Apocalypse Now Redux
Apollonia Vitelli-Corleone
Apple Inc.
Aram Avakian
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Art film
Arthur Penn
Atonement (2007 film)
Au revoir les enfants
Avatar (2009 film)
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role
BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role
BAFTA Award for Best Costume Design
BAFTA Award for Best Film Music
BAFTA Award for Best Newcomer
BAFTA Award for Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Roles
BBC
BBC News
Babel (film)
Bada Bing!
Barbie (film)
Bart Simpson
Battle Beyond the Sun
Becket (1964 film)
Bela Lugosi
Belfast (film)
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Best & Co.
Beverly Estate
Birdman (film)
Blockbuster (entertainment)
Blu-ray Disc
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Bram Stoker's Dracula (1992 film)
Braveheart
Bridge of Spies (film)
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Brokeback Mountain
Bugsy
Burt Lancaster
Burt Reynolds
Butterflies Are Free
C'è la luna mezzo mare
CBS Interactive
CBS News
CODA (2021 film)
Cahiers du cinéma
California
Caporegime
Captain EO
Captain McCluskey
Car bomb
Cardinal Lamberto
Carlo Rizzi (The Godfather)
Carmela Corleone
Carmine Caridi
Carmine Coppola
Casablanca (film)
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Chariots of Fire
Charles Bluhdorn
Charles Grenzbach
Chicago (2002 film)
Chicago Sun Times
Chicago Tribune
Child's Play (franchise)
Chinatown (1974 film)
Chris Newman (sound engineer)
Christopher Columbus: The Discovery
Cimarron (1931 film)
Cinema of the United States
Citizen Kane
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Connie Corleone
Consigliere
Contract killing
Corleone family
Corrado Gaipa
Cosa Nostra
Costa-Gavras
Crash (2004 film)
Crime boss
Crime film
Cyrano de Bergerac (1990 film)
Daily Variety
Dances with Wolves
Danny Thomas
Darling Lili
David Chase
David di Donatello for Best Foreign Film
Dead Poets Society
Dean Stockwell
Dell Publishing
Dementia 13
Desson Thomson
Diane Keaton
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film
Distant Vision
Django Unchained
Doctor Zhivago (film)
Doi (identifier)
Don (honorific)
Don Altobello
Don Fanucci
Don Juan DeMarco
Dracula (Universal film series)
DreamWorks Pictures
Driving Miss Daisy
Dunkirk (2017 film)
Dustin Hoffman
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
ESPN
Earthquake (1974 film)
East Harlem
East of Eden (film)
Eccentricity (behavior)
Ed Mirvish Theatre
Eduardo De Filippo
Edward Falco
Elia Kazan
Emilio Barzini
Empire (magazine)
Entertainment Weekly
Epic film
Ernest Borgnine
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Fandango Media
Fanny and Alexander
Film4
Filmsite.org
Filmways
Finian's Rainbow (1968 film)
Five Families (The Godfather)
Foley Square
Fools Die
Forrest Gump
Fortunella (film)
Forza d'Agrò
Francis Ford Coppola
Francis Ford Coppola's unrealized projects
Francis Ford Coppola Presents
Francis Ford Coppola bibliography
Francis Ford Coppola filmography
Franco Citti
Frank Darabont
Frank Pentangeli
Frankenstein (Universal film series)
Franklin J. Schaffner
Fredo Corleone
From Here to Eternity
Fulgencio (Modern Family)
Gale (identifier)
Gambino crime family
Gandhi (film)
Gangster film
Gardens of Stone
Garrote
Geffen Records
Gene Siskel
Gentleman's Agreement
George C. Scott
Gianni Russo
Gigi (1958 film)
Gladiator (2000 film)
Godfather (disambiguation)
Godparent
Godzilla (franchise)
Going My Way
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director – Motion Picture
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score
Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Gone with the Wind (film)
Goodfellas
Gordon Willis
Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media
Gran Torino
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Green Book (film)
Greta Gerwig
Gross rental
Guess Who's Coming to Dinner
Gulf+Western
Halloween (franchise)
Hamlet (1948 film)
HarperCollins
Harris County Public Library
Hempstead House
Hereafter (film)
History (U.S. TV network)
Honoré de Balzac
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Hyman Roth
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
Il figlioccio del padrino
In the Heat of the Night (film)
In the Name of the Father (film)
Indiana Jones
Inflation
Inglourious Basterds
Inside Las Vegas
Internet Archive
Is Paris Burning? (film)
It Happened One Night
Italian-American Civil Rights League
Italian American
Jack (1996 film)
Jack Nicholson
James Caan
Jaws (film)
Jeannie Linero
Jesus Christ Superstar (film)
Jewish-American organized crime
Joey Zasa
John Addison
John Belushi
John Cazale
John Marley
John Podhoretz
John Wayne
Johnny Belinda (1948 film)
Johnny Fontane
Johnny Martino
Joseph Colombo
Judgment at Nuremberg
Julie Gregg
Kansas City
Kay Adams-Corleone
Kinema Junpo
Kingsley Ben-Adir
Kirk Douglas
Kramer vs. Kramer
Lani Loa – The Passage
Las Vegas
Las Vegas Review-Journal
Laurence Olivier
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Le Père Goriot
Lenny Montana
Library of Congress
Lisa's Pony
List of 1972 box office number-one films in the United States
List of James Bond films
List of The Godfather characters
List of The Godfather series characters
List of awards and nominations received by Francis Ford Coppola
List of films considered the best
List of films set in Las Vegas
List of highest-grossing films in Canada and the United States
Loew's State Theatre (New York City)
Los Angeles
Los Angeles Times
Love Story (1970 film)
Love Theme from The Godfather
Luca Brasi
Lucy Mancini
Made man
Mafia
Mafia!
Manhattan
Marathon Man (film)
Mario Bava
Mario Puzo
Mark Feeney
Mark Seal
Mark Winegardner
Marlon Brando
Martin Ritt
Martin Scorsese
Martin Sheen
Marty (film)
Marty Symes
Mary Corleone
Mary Shelley's Frankenstein (film)
McFarland & Company
Megalopolis (film)
Mephisto (1981 film)
Metacritic
Michael Corleone
Michael Sragow
Midnight Cowboy
Midnight Express (film)
Million Dollar Baby
Mitchel Air Force Base
Modern Family
Modern family (season 4)
Moe Greene
Moonlight (2016 film)
Morgana King
Motion Picture Editors Guild
Mott Street
Mr. Plow
Mrs. Miniver
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
NBC
NYPD
Nashville, Tennessee
Nashville (film)
National Film Registry
National Society of Film Critics
Nelly and Mr. Arnaud
New York (magazine)
New York City
New York Stories
New York Supreme Court
Newsweek
Nielsen rating
Nino Rota
No Country for Old Men
Nocturnal Animals
Nomadland
OCLC (identifier)
Oliver! (film)
Omertà (novel)
On Golden Pond (1981 film)
On the Waterfront
Once Upon a Time in America
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
One from the Heart
Ordinary People
Orson Welles
Otto Preminger
Out of Africa (film)
Packard Super Eight
Paint Your Wagon (film)
Paramount+
Paramount Pictures
Paramount Records (1969)
Parasite (2019 film)
Patriarca crime family
Patton (film)
Pauline Kael
Peggy Sue Got Married
Peter Bart
Peter Bogdanovich
Peter Clemenza
Peter Yates
Peter Zinner
Platoon (film)
Promise Me You'll Remember (Love Theme from The Godfather Part III)
Pulp Fiction
Rain Man
Raise the Red Lantern
Rebecca (1940 film)
Review aggregator
Richard Bright (actor)
Richard Brooks
Richard Castellano
Richard Conte
Richard Portman
Riders of Destiny
Ridicule (film)
Robert A. Harris
Robert De Niro
Robert Duvall
Robert Evans
Robert Redford
Robert Towne
Rocky
Roger Ebert
Roma (2018 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Rubicon Estate Winery
Rudy Bond
Rumble Fish
Russell Bufalino
Ryan's Daughter
Ryan O'Neal
Sacheen Littlefeather
Salvatore Tessio
Sammy Gravano
San Francisco
Sandra Corleone
Saro Urzì
Saturday Night Live
Saturn Award for Best DVD or Blu-ray Collection
Saving Private Ryan
Savoca
Scent of a Woman (1992 film)
Schindler's List
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Sergio Leone
Shakespeare in Love
Sicily
Sight & Sound
Silvio Dante
Simonetta Stefanelli
Slate (magazine)
Sleuth (1972 film)
Slumdog Millionaire
Smithsonian (magazine)
Sofia Coppola
Sonny Corleone
Spartacus (film)
Speak Softly Love (Love Theme from The Godfather)
SpongeBob SquarePants
Spotlight (film)
Stanley Jaffe
Stanley Kauffmann
Stanley Kubrick
Star Trek
Star Wars original trilogy
Staten Island
Sterling Hayden
Steven Spielberg
Styrofoam
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Superman (1978 film)
Superman II
Superman II: The Richard Donner Cut
THX 1138
Tableware
Take the Cannoli
Talia Shire
Tattaglia family
Terms of Endearment
Tetro
The A.V. Club
The Agony and the Ecstasy (film)
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Aviator (2004 film)
The Barbarian Invasions
The Bellboy and the Playgirls
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Bronx
The Brotherhood (1968 film)
The Cardinal
The Conversation
The Cotton Club (film)
The Criterion Collection
The Dark Arena
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Departed
The Descendants
The Empire Strikes Back
The English Patient (film)
The Exorcist
The Fabelmans
The Family (Puzo novel)
The Family Corleone
The Florentine (film)
The Fortunate Pilgrim
The Fortunate Pilgrim (miniseries)
The Fourth K
The French Connection (film)
The Freshman (1990 film)
The Full Monty
The Funny Face of the Godfather
The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight (film)
The Gazette (Montreal)
The Godfather's Revenge
The Godfather (1991 video game)
The Godfather (2006 video game)
The Godfather (book series)
The Godfather (film series)
The Godfather (novel)
The Godfather (soundtrack)
The Godfather Coda: The Death of Michael Corleone
The Godfather Effect
The Godfather II (video game)
The Godfather Papers and Other Confessions
The Godfather Part II
The Godfather Part III
The Godfather Part III (soundtrack)
The Godfather Part II (soundtrack)
The Godfather Returns
The Godfather Saga
The Godson (film)
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Great Gatsby (1974 film)
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Guardian
The Guns of Navarone (film)
The Hollywood Reporter
The Hours (film)
The Hurt Locker
The Independent
The Irish Independent
The Junky's Christmas
The King's Speech
The Last Don
The Last Emperor
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Man Who Wasn't There (2001 film)
The Marriage of Figaro
The New Republic
The New York Times
The New York Times Best Seller list
The New Yorker
The Nightcomers
The Numbers (website)
The Odyssey (1997 miniseries)
The Offer
The Outsiders (film)
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Prince and the Showgirl
The Rain People
The Rainmaker (1997 film)
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Robe (film)
The Runaway Summer of Davie Shaw
The Secret Garden (1993 film)
The Shape of Water
The Sicilian
The Sight & Sound Greatest Films of All Time 2012
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Simpsons
The Simpsons (season 3)
The Simpsons (season 4)
The Social Network
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sopranos
The Sound of Music (film)
The Sting
The Taste of Others
The Towering Inferno
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The Vancouver Sun
The Village Voice
The Virgin Suicides (film)
The Washington Post
The Wishing Tree (1976 film)
This Property Is Condemned
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Time (magazine)
Time Out (magazine)
Timeline of highest-grossing films
Titanic (1997 film)
Todt Hill
Tom Hagen
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tom Santopietro
Tonight for Sure
Tony Giorgio
Toronto
Train of Life
Tucker: The Man and His Dream
Turner Classic Movies
Twixt (film)
Ty Burr
Underboss
Unforgiven
United States
United States Marine Corps
Universal Classic Monsters
University of Pennsylvania
Vanity Fair (magazine)
Variety (magazine)
Vautrin
Vic Damone
Victor Rendina
Vincent Canby
Vincent Corleone
Virgil Sollozzo
Vito Corleone
Vito Scotti
Warner Bros.
Warren Beatty
Waterloo (1970 film)
Weighted average
West Side Story (1961 film)
Western (genre)
William Reynolds (film editor)
Wings (1927 film)
Writers Guild of America, West
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Writers Guild of America West
You're a Big Boy Now
YouTube
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Youth Without Youth (film)
Zoetrope: All-Story
https://web.archive.org/web/20140717004801/http://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/the-godfather-turns-40/3/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140714155852/http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2009/03/godfather200903.print
http://www.tcm.com/this-month/article=191909%7C191910/Sergio-Leone-Profile.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140716203520/http://www.tcm.com/this-month/article/191909%7C191910/Sergio-Leone-Profile.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140716203731/http://www.nytimes.com/movies/person/99378/Sergio-Leone/biography
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/nov/30/features
https://web.archive.org/web/20130827085909/http://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/nov/30/features
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/hardtalk/4149215.stm
https://web.archive.org/web/20100903164506/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/hardtalk/4149215.stm
http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/page3/story?page=10bqs/bogdanovich
https://web.archive.org/web/20131110015717/http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/page3/story?page=10bqs/bogdanovich
https://web.archive.org/web/20090924220152/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/starsandstories/6189162/The-Godfather-Nobody-enjoyed-one-day-of-it.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140717010438/http://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/the-godfather-turns-40/6/
http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/francis-ford-coppolas-the-godfather-opens
https://web.archive.org/web/20140704190556/http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/francis-ford-coppolas-the-godfather-opens
https://web.archive.org/web/20140721025504/http://theweek.com/article/index/217260/the-making-of-the-godfather
https://web.archive.org/web/20140725190051/http://www.nytimes.com/packages/html/movies/bestpictures/godfather-ar2.html
http://www.oscars.org/features/04022012/godfather.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20130330190747/http://www.oscars.org/features/04022012/godfather.html
http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1991-05-13/features/9102120535_1_anthony-quinn-don-vito-corleone-raf-vallone
https://web.archive.org/web/20140715161232/http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1991-05-13/features/9102120535_1_anthony-quinn-don-vito-corleone-raf-vallone
https://web.archive.org/web/20140716173034/http://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/the-godfather-turns-40/10/
http://entertainment.time.com/2012/03/15/the-anniversary-you-cant-refuse-40-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-godfather/slide/very-few-people-wanted-al-pacino-for-michael/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140102144248/http://entertainment.time.com/2012/03/15/the-anniversary-you-cant-refuse-40-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-godfather/slide/very-few-people-wanted-al-pacino-for-michael/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140716173414/http://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/the-godfather-turns-40/9/
https://web.archive.org/web/20130626141639/http://www.npr.org/templates/transcript/transcript.php?storyId=132203547
http://www.publicbroadcasting.net/wutc/.artsmain/article/8/1083/1027096/Movies/A.Study.in.Contrasts/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140720200112/http://www.publicbroadcasting.net/wutc/.artsmain/article/8/1083/1027096/Movies/A.Study.in.Contrasts/
https://itunes.apple.com/gb/album/godfather-original-motion/id61948057
https://web.archive.org/web/20140720150218/http://www.allmusic.com/album/the-godfather-original-soundtrack-mw0000263301
http://www.filmtracks.com/titles/godfather.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140720150807/http://www.filmtracks.com/titles/godfather.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140717165334/http://www.afi.com/members/catalog/DetailView.aspx?s=&Movie=54023
http://www.afi.com/members/catalog/DetailView.aspx?s=&Movie=54023
http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/443184/The-Godfather/notes.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20131029203642/http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/443184/The-Godfather/notes.html
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=O1FmAAAAIBAJ&sjid=IIsNAAAAIBAJ&pg=3532,3440664
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=MBQyAAAAIBAJ&sjid=2qEFAAAAIBAJ&pg=4954,1823132
http://www.filmsite.org/greatfilmssummary.html
http://www.afi.com/wise/films/sound_of_music/sound.html
http://www.history.com/topics/the-mafia-in-popular-culture
https://web.archive.org/web/20140717042547/http://www.history.com/topics/the-mafia-in-popular-culture
https://web.archive.org/web/20140719043010/http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/the-godfather-1972
http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1999-10-15/entertainment/9910200025_1_movie-reviews-star-film
https://web.archive.org/web/20140701142740/http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1999-10-15/entertainment/9910200025_1_movie-reviews-star-film
http://blogs.villagevoice.com/runninscared/2011/02/the_godfather_a.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20131024092323/http://blogs.villagevoice.com/runninscared/2011/02/the_godfather_a.php
https://web.archive.org/web/20140716230256/http://bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/sight-sound-magazine/polls-surveys/stanley-kubrick-cinephile
http://www.paramount.com/paramount-academy-awards/tags/143/the-1970s
http://www.independent.ie/entertainment/film-cinema/only-the-most-talented-actors-have-the-nerve-to-tackle-roles-that-push-them-to-their-physical-and-mental-limits-2946356.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140407133410/http://www.loc.gov/film/titles.html
http://www.filmsite.org/timeout2.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140718213202/http://www.filmsite.org/timeout2.html
http://old.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/polls/topten/poll/directors.html
http://old.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/topten/poll/critics.html
http://www.filmsite.org/filmfour.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140331175148/http://www.filmsite.org/filmfour.html
http://entertainment.time.com/2005/02/12/all-time-100-movies/slide/all/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140717165334/http://entertainment.time.com/2005/02/12/all-time-100-movies/slide/all/
http://entertainment.time.com/2005/02/12/all-time-100-movies/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140714233324/http://entertainment.time.com/2005/02/12/all-time-100-movies/
http://www.wga.org/subpage_newsevents.aspx?id=1807
https://web.archive.org/web/20140328213749/http://wga.org/subpage_newsevents.aspx?id=1807
https://web.archive.org/web/20140708071008/http://www.empireonline.com/500/99.asp
http://www.filmsite.org/ew100.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140331185517/http://www.filmsite.org/ew100.html
http://www.hcpl.lib.tx.us/watch/entertainment-weeklys-100-greatest-movies-all-time
https://web.archive.org/web/20120111142325/http://www.hcpl.lib.tx.us/watch/entertainment-weeklys-100-greatest-movies-all-time
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/movies100.pdf
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/thrills100.pdf
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/quotes100.pdf
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/scores25.pdf
http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/100Movies.pdf
http://www.afi.com/10top10/category.aspx?cat=8
http://tags.library.upenn.edu/project/27508
http://www.afi.com/100Years/quotes.aspx
https://web.archive.org/web/20140702074057/http://www.afi.com/100years/quotes.aspx
http://www.literaturepage.com/read/balzac-father-goriot-104.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20150823154348/http://www.nytimes.com/movies/movie/76239/The-Godfather-Family-A-Look-Inside/overview
https://web.archive.org/web/20150823155038/http://www.ew.com/article/2001/10/09/godfather-dvd-collection
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/life/movies/dvd/2008-09-22-godfather-restored_N.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20140721213818/http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/life/movies/dvd/2008-09-22-godfather-restored_N.htm
http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/dvdextras/2008/09/your_dvd_player_sleeps_with_the_fishes.single.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140721215000/http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/dvdextras/2008/09/your_dvd_player_sleeps_with_the_fishes.single.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140721213237/http://www.avclub.com/review/the-godfather-the-coppola-restoration-6803
https://web.archive.org/web/20140721220026/http://www.slantmagazine.com/dvd/review/the-godfather-collection-the-coppola-restoration
http://www.showbizdata.com/contacts/picknews.cfm/38287/COPPOLA_ANGRY_OVER_%3CI%3EGODFATHER%3C/I%3E_VIDEO_GAME
https://books.google.com/books?id=2482tWkpfpQC
https://books.google.com/books?id=7AuRjwS9KDkC
https://www.nytimes.com/movies/person/99378/Sergio-Leone/biography
https://www.nytimes.com/packages/html/movies/bestpictures/godfather-ar2.html
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=EE05E7DF1739E464BC4E52DFB5668389669EDE&partner=Rotten%2520Tomatoes
https://www.nytimes.com/movies/movie/76239/The-Godfather-Family-A-Look-Inside/overview
https://newrepublic.com/article/101783/the-godfather-decline-marlon-brando
https://web.archive.org/web/20150511094252/http://www.independent.co.uk/travel/europe/in-search-of-the-godfather-in-sicily-595994.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140720014803/https://itunes.apple.com/gb/album/godfather-original-motion/id61948057
https://web.archive.org/web/20071220182910/http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2005/03/04/entertainment/main678113.shtml
http://www.reviewjournal.com/lvrj_home/2004/Jul-07-Wed-2004/news/24256307.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140720153054/http://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=EE05E7DF1739E464BC4E52DFB5668389669EDE&partner=Rotten%20Tomatoes
https://web.archive.org/web/20140717144410/http://www.hfpa.org/browse/?param=/year/1972
http://www.hfpa.org/browse/?param=/year/1972
https://web.archive.org/web/20140717051744/http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/45th-winners.html
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1973
https://web.archive.org/web/20140717155933/http://awards.bafta.org/keyword-search?keywords=1973
http://awards.bafta.org/keyword-search?keywords=1973
https://web.archive.org/web/20150317101140/https://www.editorsguild.com/magazine.cfm?ArticleID=1102
https://viaf.org/viaf/316753502
https://www.idref.fr/098309358
https://www.independent.co.uk/travel/europe/in-search-of-the-godfather-in-sicily-595994.html
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/videos/godfatherhowe.htm
https://books.google.com/books?id=MNi9qYe-ZUsC
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4133657-4
https://www.loc.gov/film/titles.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20081007060450/http://tags.library.upenn.edu/project/27508
https://web.archive.org/web/20120416045133/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/3573927/Top-five-John-Belushi-moments.html
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/the-simpsons-film-parodies-seen-side-by-side-with-their-references-a6867666.html
http://awards.wga.org/wga-awards/previous-nominees-winners2
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0068646/
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/starsandstories/6189162/The-Godfather-Nobody-enjoyed-one-day-of-it.html
https://www.npr.org/templates/transcript/transcript.php?storyId=132203547
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/3573927/Top-five-John-Belushi-moments.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20160307145015/http://awards.wga.org/wga-awards/previous-nominees-winners2
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/54023
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=godfather.htm
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/godfather
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb13751570m
https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/packages/html/movies/bestpictures/godfather-re.html
http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/What-is-The-Godfather-Effect.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/23/movies/23dvds.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140721212636/http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/23/movies/23dvds.html
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/the-godfather
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb13751570m
https://archive.org/details/hollywoodrenaiss00jaco/page/115
https://archive.org/details/100greatestmovie00burr
https://archive.org/details/georgelucassbloc00alex
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47703#P345
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47703#P3593
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47703#P1237
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47703#P1258
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47703#P1712
https://web.archive.org/web/20130321031300/http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=godfather97.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1876&dat=19730125&id=T2wsAAAAIBAJ&sjid=-8wEAAAAIBAJ&pg=5923,3978133
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2245&dat=19720314&id=mWgzAAAAIBAJ&sjid=JDIHAAAAIBAJ&pg=7274,5626165
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195948/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1350&dat=19710627&id=cC9PAAAAIBAJ&sjid=0QEEAAAAIBAJ&pg=7253,933388
https://web.archive.org/web/20170214213007/https://books.google.com/books?id=7AuRjwS9KDkC
https://web.archive.org/web/20140720151523/http://www.allmusic.com/album/the-godfather-original-soundtrack-mw0000263301/credits
https://web.archive.org/web/20131014123530/http://www.filmsite.org/greatfilmssummary.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20151104202727/http://www.afi.com/wise/films/sound_of_music/sound.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20090504000735/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/adjusted.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20190722210122/https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/godfather
https://web.archive.org/web/20170929231718/http://www.metacritic.com/movie/the-godfather
https://web.archive.org/web/20181116201805/https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/packages/html/movies/bestpictures/godfather-re.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170320233434/https://newrepublic.com/article/101783/the-godfather-decline-marlon-brando
https://web.archive.org/web/20130602161140/http://www.rogerebert.com/rogers-journal/whole-lotta-cantin-going-on
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1755&dat=19730305&id=xXIjAAAAIBAJ&sjid=rmYEAAAAIBAJ&pg=7292,1858045
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1314&dat=19730309&id=6h1OAAAAIBAJ&sjid=DO0DAAAAIBAJ&pg=6364,4343285
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1873&dat=19730302&id=fE4fAAAAIBAJ&sjid=otEEAAAAIBAJ&pg=708,398081
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=uscuAAAAIBAJ&sjid=f6EFAAAAIBAJ&pg=871,1907982
https://web.archive.org/web/20130604233242/http://www.paramount.com/paramount-academy-awards/tags/143/the-1970s
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2512&dat=19730326&id=gO1HAAAAIBAJ&sjid=4v8MAAAAIBAJ&pg=2462,3490724
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1300&dat=19730329&id=WslUAAAAIBAJ&sjid=4ZADAAAAIBAJ&pg=4606,6893153
https://web.archive.org/web/20111129055536/http://www.independent.ie/entertainment/film-cinema/only-the-most-talented-actors-have-the-nerve-to-tackle-roles-that-push-them-to-their-physical-and-mental-limits-2946356.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20141007233027/http://old.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/polls/topten/poll/directors.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140407100835/http://old.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/topten/poll/critics.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20190412113202/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/movies100.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20140328082214/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/thrills100.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20160803184308/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/scores25.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20130606072909/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/100Movies.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20161118033523/http://www.afi.com/10top10/category.aspx?cat=8
https://web.archive.org/web/20060410171239/http://www.showbizdata.com/contacts/picknews.cfm/38287/COPPOLA_ANGRY_OVER_%253CI%253EGODFATHER%253C/I%253E_VIDEO_GAME
https://web.archive.org/web/20130423232235/http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/What-is-The-Godfather-Effect.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20140222041550/http://www.literaturepage.com/read/balzac-father-goriot-104.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110125080407/http://www.reviewjournal.com/lvrj_home/2004/Jul-07-Wed-2004/news/24256307.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170116182814/http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/the-simpsons-film-parodies-seen-side-by-side-with-their-references-a6867666.html
https://archive.org/details/mafiaencyclopedi00sifa
https://archive.org/details/postmodernauteur0000vong
https://web.archive.org/web/20190605170651/https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=KP0HAQAAMAAJ&q=%22million+in+worldwide+sales%22+godfather
https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/Godfather-The#tab=summary
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0068646/
https://authority.bibsys.no/authority/rest/authorities/html/10040018
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX4978945
https://hollywoodreporter.com/list/100-greatest-films-all-time-713215
https://web.archive.org/web/20141221100526/https://hollywoodreporter.com/list/100-greatest-films-all-time-713215
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47703#P856
https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2009/03/godfather200903
https://theweek.com/article/index/217260/the-making-of-the-godfather
https://www.allmusic.com/album/the-godfather-original-soundtrack-mw0000263301
https://www.allmusic.com/album/the-godfather-original-soundtrack-mw0000263301/credits
https://www.ew.com/article/2001/10/09/godfather-dvd-collection
https://www.avclub.com/review/the-godfather-the-coppola-restoration-6803
https://www.slantmagazine.com/dvd/review/the-godfather-collection-the-coppola-restoration
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=godfather97.htm
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/adjusted.htm
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/the-godfather-1972
https://www.rogerebert.com/rogers-journal/whole-lotta-cantin-going-on
https://www.variety.com/blog/890000489/post/370020437.html
https://www.empireonline.com/500/99.asp
https://archive.org/details/hollywoodrenaiss00jaco
https://archive.org/details/postmodernauteur0000vong/page/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190314054958/https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/Godfather-The#tab=summary
https://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/the-godfather-turns-40/3/
https://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/the-godfather-turns-40/6/
https://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/the-godfather-turns-40/10/
https://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/the-godfather-turns-40/9/
https://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2005/03/04/entertainment/main678113.shtml
https://www.nytimes.com/movies/movie/20076/The-Godfather/cast
https://web.archive.org/web/20140418100447/https://www.nytimes.com/movies/movie/20076/The-Godfather/cast
https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=jf1QuY9pcDk
https://web.archive.org/web/20191116070558/https://tv.avclub.com/modern-family-fulgencio-1798175588
https://web.archive.org/web/20191218133047/https://archive.org/details/georgelucassbloc00alex
https://web.archive.org/web/20140627144833/http://books.google.com/books?id=2482tWkpfpQC
https://web.archive.org/web/20200605001103/https://books.google.com/books?id=MNi9qYe-ZUsC
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47703#identifiers
https://www.loc.gov/static/programs/national-film-preservation-board/documents/godfather.pdf
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1876&dat=19730125&id=T2wsAAAAIBAJ&pg=5923,3978133
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=888&dat=19780410&id=f2xQAAAAIBAJ&pg=6609,2060270
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1957&dat=19901223&id=KSNHAAAAIBAJ&pg=1076,6645763
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2245&dat=19720314&id=mWgzAAAAIBAJ&pg=7274,5626165
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1350&dat=19710627&id=cC9PAAAAIBAJ&pg=7253,933388
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=861&dat=19710530&id=c7hdAAAAIBAJ&pg=5244,4907552
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2209&dat=19730131&id=kZ0rAAAAIBAJ&pg=2249,4325252
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1915&dat=19730201&id=AC8iAAAAIBAJ&pg=2622,83769
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1755&dat=19730305&id=xXIjAAAAIBAJ&pg=7292,1858045
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1314&dat=19730309&id=6h1OAAAAIBAJ&pg=6364,4343285
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=Vc9OAAAAIBAJ&pg=7352,3061459
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2706&dat=19730214&id=OQtbAAAAIBAJ&pg=2552,1412143
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1873&dat=19730302&id=fE4fAAAAIBAJ&pg=708,398081
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=uscuAAAAIBAJ&pg=871,1907982
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1158&dat=19771026&id=-bFTAAAAIBAJ&pg=2181,6820974
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2512&dat=19730326&id=gO1HAAAAIBAJ&pg=2462,3490724
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1300&dat=19730329&id=WslUAAAAIBAJ&pg=4606,6893153
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1946&dat=19730328&id=HIMuAAAAIBAJ&pg=6468,3445418
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=861&dat=20060331&id=ZAJZAAAAIBAJ&pg=4060,6860967&hl=en
https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1891&dat=20050520&id=nncvAAAAIBAJ&pg=3018,2133234&hl=en
https://books.google.com/books?id=7uICAAAAMBAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=evrkAgAAQBAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=EA1SCEmDyBMC
https://books.google.com/books?id=6XBHAgAAQBAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=YhdU8thA6eEC
https://books.google.com/books?id=5LQ0AwAAQBAJ
https://books.google.com/books?id=-d-x9_VhoEgC
https://books.google.com/books?id=3m5SrXs42YEC
https://books.google.com/books?id=abaKDwAAQBAJ&q=Riders+of+Destiny+godfather+offer+can't+refuse&pg=PR22
https://books.google.com/books?id=2482tWkpfpQC&pg=PA94
https://web.archive.org/web/20201114025323/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=888&dat=19780410&id=f2xQAAAAIBAJ&pg=6609,2060270
https://web.archive.org/web/20201114025326/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1957&dat=19901223&id=KSNHAAAAIBAJ&pg=1076,6645763
https://web.archive.org/web/20201114025352/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=861&dat=19710530&id=c7hdAAAAIBAJ&pg=5244,4907552
https://web.archive.org/web/20201114025335/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2209&dat=19730131&id=kZ0rAAAAIBAJ&pg=2249,4325252
https://web.archive.org/web/20201114025327/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1915&dat=19730201&id=AC8iAAAAIBAJ&pg=2622,83769
https://web.archive.org/web/20201114025335/https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=Vc9OAAAAIBAJ&pg=7352,3061459
https://web.archive.org/web/20201114025336/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2706&dat=19730214&id=OQtbAAAAIBAJ&pg=2552,1412143
https://web.archive.org/web/20201114025328/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1158&dat=19771026&id=-bFTAAAAIBAJ&pg=2181,6820974
https://web.archive.org/web/20200912065405/https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=jf1QuY9pcDk
https://web.archive.org/web/20210104164629/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1946&dat=19730328&id=HIMuAAAAIBAJ&pg=6468,3445418
https://web.archive.org/web/20210104164336/https://books.google.com/books?id=abaKDwAAQBAJ&q=Riders+of+Destiny+godfather+offer+can't+refuse&pg=PR22
https://web.archive.org/web/20210104164426/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=861&dat=20060331&id=ZAJZAAAAIBAJ&pg=4060,6860967&hl=en
https://web.archive.org/web/20210104164413/https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1891&dat=20050520&id=nncvAAAAIBAJ&pg=3018,2133234&hl=en
https://web.archive.org/web/20160426050042/http://www.italic.org/mediaWatch/filmStudy.php
http://www.italic.org/mediaWatch/filmStudy.php
http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20150720-the-100-greatest-american-films
https://web.archive.org/web/20160916105535/http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20150720-the-100-greatest-american-films
http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/sightandsoundpoll2012/critics
http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/sightandsoundpoll2012/directors
https://www.digitalspy.com/movies/a787968/12-hidden-godfather-references-in-movies-and-tv-shows-the-sopranos-spectre-star-wars-and-more/
https://thependragonsociety.com/the-sight-sound-top-ten-poll-1992/
https://web.archive.org/web/20060908200137/http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20041215/COMMENTARY/41215001/1023
http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20041215/COMMENTARY/41215001/1023
https://web.archive.org/web/20160207035347/http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/sightandsoundpoll2012/critics
https://web.archive.org/web/20160209010504/http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/sightandsoundpoll2012/directors
https://web.archive.org/web/20210318214144/https://www2.bfi.org.uk/greatest-films-all-time
https://web.archive.org/web/20210407141247/https://www.digitalspy.com/movies/a787968/12-hidden-godfather-references-in-movies-and-tv-shows-the-sopranos-spectre-star-wars-and-more/
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/20/godfather-coppola-arthouse
http://www.filmdetail.com/2008/11/23/cahiers-du-cinemas-100-greatest-films/
https://web.archive.org/web/20070826201343/http://www.villagevoice.com/specials/take/one/full_list.php3?category=10
http://www.villagevoice.com/specials/take/one/full_list.php3?category=10
https://variety.com/2018/film/news/burt-reynolds-turned-down-roles-bond-solo-1202930436/
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1972/03/18/alchemy-pauline-kael/amp
https://web.archive.org/web/20100501064506/http://www.kinejun.jp/special/90alltimebest/index.html
http://www.kinejun.jp/special/90alltimebest/index.html
https://archive.org/details/alistnationalsoc00jayc
https://archive.org/details/alistnationalsoc00jayc/page/81
https://www.filmsite.org/alist.html
http://movieline.com/2004/11/01/jack-nicholson-a-chat-with-jack/
https://www.avclub.com/modern-family-fulgencio-1798175588
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007588659905171
https://italic.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/filmStudySlides1228-1.pdf
http://sandspointpreserveconservancy.org/production/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140327155320if_/http://catdir.loc.gov:80/catdir/samples/cam032/99017674.pdf
http://catdir.loc.gov:80/catdir/samples/cam032/99017674.pdf
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/29/godfather-al-pacino-role-coppola-didnt-want
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058516986906706
https://hd-report.com/2022/01/13/the-godfather-trilogy-releasing-to-4k-finally/
https://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=godfather.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20120128142949/http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=godfather.htm
https://deadline.com/2022/01/the-offer-making-of-the-godfather-series-premiere-date-paramount-plus-1234908087/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_godfather
https://aleph.nkp.cz/F/?func=find-c&local_base=aut&ccl_term=ica=unn20181010535&CON_LNG=ENG
https://web.archive.org/web/20140720152823/http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/videos/godfatherhowe.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20110313150615/http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/quotes100.pdf
https://web.archive.org/web/20160612224313/http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/godfather
https://bbfc.co.uk/releases/godfather
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=DkwaAAAAIBAJ&pg=7006,4931444
https://web.archive.org/web/20181121195947/https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=DkwaAAAAIBAJ&sjid=nigEAAAAIBAJ&pg=7006,4931444
https://www.nytimes.com/1972/04/16/archives/profits-of-the-godfather-1million-a-day-pours-into-box-offices.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180910061131/https://www.nytimes.com/1972/04/16/archives/profits-of-the-godfather-1million-a-day-pours-into-box-offices.html
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/what-is-the-godfather-effect-83473971/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180910061138/https://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/what-is-the-godfather-effect-83473971/
https://go.gale.com/ps/anonymous?id=GALE%7CA696504953
https://www.npr.org/2022/03/14/1085478918/imagine-the-godfather-with-a-completely-different-cast-couldve-happened
http://www.thegodfather.com/
https://guestofaguest.com/los-angeles/real-estate/inside-the-former-hearst-mansion-on-the-market-for-dollar195-million
https://www.businessinsider.com/california-mansion-godfather-horse-head-scene-beverly-hills-photos-2018-10
https://www.townandcountrymag.com/leisure/arts-and-culture/a40653831/godfather-house-airbnb-50-dollars-night/
https://www.nytimes.com/1971/03/23/archives/corporate-rift-in-godfather-filming.html
https://doi.org/10.1017%2FCBO9781139172912.002
https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/60420173
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0028-7369
https://books.google.com/books?id=sCXkAAAAMAAJ&q=%22$285+million%22
https://books.google.com/books?id=vpbuSXSSqdkC&pg=PA527
https://web.archive.org/web/20140921183611/http://books.google.com/books?id=7uICAAAAMBAJ&printsec=frontcover
https://web.archive.org/web/20151025085017/https://books.google.com/books?id=evrkAgAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover
https://web.archive.org/web/20151109125603/https://books.google.com/books?id=EA1SCEmDyBMC&printsec=frontcover
https://web.archive.org/web/20200629231320/https://books.google.com/books?id=6XBHAgAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover
https://web.archive.org/web/20140610214501/http://books.google.com/books?id=YhdU8thA6eEC&printsec=frontcover
https://web.archive.org/web/20151120180718/https://books.google.com/books?id=5LQ0AwAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover
https://web.archive.org/web/20151017052255/https://books.google.com/books?id=-d-x9_VhoEgC&printsec=frontcover
https://web.archive.org/web/20170328133416/https://books.google.com/books?id=3m5SrXs42YEC&printsec=frontcover
https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Godfather-film-by-Coppola
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/n90677847
https://www.filmweb.pl/film/Ojciec+chrzestny-1972-1089
https://www.marieclaire.com/culture/barbie-movie-references-easter-eggs/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230730103001/https://www.marieclaire.com/culture/barbie-movie-references-easter-eggs/
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1997/03/24/godfatherhood
https://www.arkansasonline.com/news/2022/mar/18/after-50-years-the-godfather-still-resonates/
https://faroutmagazine.co.uk/steven-spielberg-20-favourite-movies/
https://www2.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/sight-sound-magazine/polls-surveys/stanley-kubrick-cinephile
https://archive.today/20120915120909/http://www.variety.com/blog/890000489/post/370020437.html
https://www.bfi.org.uk/sight-and-sound/greatest-films-all-time
