The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers is a 2002 epic fantasy adventure film directed by Peter Jackson from a screenplay by Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, Stephen Sinclair, and Jackson, based on 1954's The Two Towers, the second volume of the novel The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien. The sequel to 2001's The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring, the film is the second instalment in The Lord of the Rings trilogy. It features an ensemble cast including Elijah Wood, Ian McKellen, Liv Tyler, Viggo Mortensen, Sean Astin, Cate Blanchett, John Rhys-Davies, Bernard Hill, Christopher Lee, Billy Boyd, Dominic Monaghan, Orlando Bloom, Hugo Weaving, Miranda Otto, David Wenham, Brad Dourif, Karl Urban, and Andy Serkis.
Continuing the plot of the previous film, it intercuts three storylines: Frodo and Sam continue their journey towards Mordor to destroy the One Ring, now aided by Gollum, the ring's untrustworthy former bearer. Merry and Pippin escape their orc captors, meet Treebeard the Ent, and help to plan an attack on Isengard, fortress of Saruman. Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli, in their pursuit, come to the war-torn nation of Rohan, and are reunited with the resurrected Gandalf before fighting against the legions of the treacherous wizard Saruman at the Battle of Helm's Deep. 
The Two Towers was financed and distributed by American studio New Line Cinema, but filmed and edited entirely in Jackson's native New Zealand, concurrently with the other two parts of the trilogy. It premiered on 5 December 2002 at the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City, and was then released on 18 December in the United States and on 19 December in New Zealand. The film was acclaimed by both critics and audiences, who considered it to be a landmark in filmmaking and an achievement in the fantasy film genre. It received praise for its direction, action sequences, performances, musical score, and CGI, particularly for Gollum. It grossed $936 million worldwide, making it the highest-grossing film of 2002, and, at the time of its release, the third highest-grossing film of all time behind Titanic and Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone. Following subsequent reissues, it has, as of 2021, grossed $947 million.Like the other films in the trilogy, The Two Towers is widely recognised as one of the greatest and most influential films ever made as well as one of the greatest sequels in cinema history. The film received numerous accolades; at the 75th Academy Awards, it was nominated for six awards, including Best Picture, winning for Best Sound Editing and Best Visual Effects.
The final instalment of the trilogy, The Return of the King, was released in 2003.


== Plot ==
Awakening from a dream of Gandalf fighting the Balrog in Moria, Frodo Baggins finds himself, along with Samwise Gamgee, lost in the Emyn Muil near Mordor. They discover that they are being tracked by Gollum, a former bearer of the One Ring. Capturing Gollum, Frodo takes pity and allows him to guide them, reminding Sam that they will need Gollum's help to infiltrate Mordor.
Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli pursue a band of Uruk-hai to save their companions Merry and Pippin, entering the kingdom of Rohan. The Uruk-hai are ambushed by a group of Rohirrim, allowing Merry and Pippin to escape into Fangorn Forest. Meeting Aragorn's group, the Rohirrim's leader Éomer explains that he and his men have been exiled by Rohan's king, Théoden, who is under the control of Saruman and his servant Gríma Wormtongue. Éomer believes Merry and Pippin were killed during the raid but leaves the group two horses. In Fangorn, Aragorn's group encounters Gandalf, who after his fight against the Balrog was resurrected as Gandalf the White to help save Middle-earth.
Gandalf leads the trio to Rohan's capital, Edoras, where Gandalf frees Théoden from Saruman's control. Aragorn stops Théoden from executing Wormtongue, who flees. Learning of Saruman's plans to destroy Rohan with his Uruk-hai army, Théoden evacuates his citizens to the fortress of the Hornburg at Helm's Deep. Gandalf departs to find Éomer and his followers, hoping they will fight for their restored king. Aragorn befriends Théoden's niece, Éowyn, who becomes infatuated with him. When the refugees travelling to Helm's Deep are attacked by Saruman's Warg-riding Orcs, Aragorn falls from a cliff and is presumed dead. He is found by Théodred's horse Brego and rides to Helm's Deep, witnessing Saruman's army marching toward the fortress.
In Rivendell, Arwen is told by her father Elrond that Aragorn will not return. He reminds her that if she remains in Middle-earth, she will outlive Aragorn by thousands of years, and she reluctantly departs for Valinor. Elrond is contacted by Galadriel of Lothlórien, who convinces him that the Elves should honour their alliance to men, and they dispatch a company of Elves to Helm's Deep.
In Fangorn, Merry and Pippin meet Treebeard, an Ent. Convincing Treebeard that they are allies, they are brought to an Ent Council, where the Ents decide not to take part in the coming war. Pippin asks Treebeard to take them in the direction of Isengard, where they witness the deforestation caused by Saruman's war effort. Enraged, Treebeard and the Ents storm Isengard, trapping Saruman in his tower.
Aragorn arrives at Helm's Deep, warning Théoden of Saruman's army approaching. Théoden prepares for battle despite being vastly outnumbered. A company of Lothlorien Elves arrives to aid the people of Rohan, shortly before Saruman's army attacks the fortress. The Uruk-hai breach the outer wall with explosives and during the ensuing charge, kill the Elves' commander, Haldir. The defenders retreat into the keep, where Aragorn convinces Théoden to meet the Uruk-hai in one last charge. At dawn, as the defenders are overwhelmed, Gandalf and Éomer arrive with the Rohirrim, turning the tide of the battle. The surviving Uruk-hai flee into Fangorn Forest and are killed by the trees. Gandalf warns that Sauron will retaliate.
Gollum leads Frodo and Sam through the Dead Marshes to the Black Gate, but recommends they enter Mordor by another route. Frodo and Sam are captured by Rangers of Ithilien led by Faramir, younger brother of the late Boromir. Frodo helps Faramir catch Gollum to save him from being killed by the Rangers. Learning of the One Ring, Faramir takes his captives to Gondor to bring the Ring to his father Denethor. Passing through the besieged city of Osgiliath, Frodo tries to explain to Faramir the true nature of the Ring, and Sam explains that Boromir was driven mad by its power. A Nazgûl nearly captures Frodo, who falls under the Ring's power, but Sam saves him and reminds a disheartened Frodo that they are fighting for the good still left in Middle-earth. Impressed by Frodo's resolve, Faramir releases them. Feeling betrayed, Gollum decides he will reclaim the Ring by leading Frodo to "her" upon arriving at Cirith Ungol.


== Cast ==

Like the other films in the series, The Two Towers has an ensemble cast, and the cast and their respective characters include:

Elijah Wood as Frodo Baggins: A young hobbit sent on a quest to destroy the One Ring, the burden of which is becoming heavier.
Ian McKellen as Gandalf the White: An Istari wizard who fell fighting a Balrog and has now returned, more powerful than ever, to finish his task.
Viggo Mortensen as Aragorn: The heir-in-exile to Gondor's throne who has come to Rohan's defence.
Sean Astin as Samwise Gamgee: Better known as Sam, Frodo's loyal hobbit gardener and companion.
Andy Serkis as Gollum (voice/motion capture): A wretched hobbit-like creature originally known as Sméagol, who owned the Ring for 500 years and now guides Frodo on his quest.
Billy Boyd as Peregrin Took: An extremely foolish hobbit who is a distant cousin of Frodo and travels with the Fellowship on their journey to Mordor.
Dominic Monaghan as Meriadoc Brandybuck: Better known as Merry, a distant cousin of Frodo's who is mistakenly captured along with Pippin by the Uruk-hai.
John Rhys-Davies as Gimli: A dwarf warrior and one of Aragorn's companions.
Also voices Treebeard: The leader of the ents, who is roused to anger after seeing that Saruman had decimated a large part of Fangorn Forest.
Orlando Bloom as Legolas: An elven archer and one of Aragorn's companions.
Bernard Hill as Théoden: The King of Rohan, who is under Saruman's spell until Gandalf heals him so he can lead his people once more. Kevin Conway was offered the role but he declined.
Christopher Lee as Saruman the White: An Istari wizard waging war upon Rohan and devastating Fangorn Forest, who allied himself with Sauron in the previous film.
Hugo Weaving as Elrond: The Elven-Lord of Rivendell who expresses doubt over his daughter's love for Aragorn.
Miranda Otto as Éowyn: Théoden's niece, who is in love with Aragorn. Uma Thurman was offered the role but turned it down and later regretted it.
David Wenham as Faramir: A prince of the Stewards of Gondor and captain of the Ithilien Rangers, who captures Frodo, Sam and Gollum.
Brad Dourif as Gríma Wormtongue: An agent of Saruman at Edoras, who renders Théoden incapable of decisions, and desires Éowyn.
Karl Urban as Éomer: Théoden's nephew and previous Chief Marshal of the Riddermark who was exiled by Gríma.
Liv Tyler as Arwen: An elven princess of Rivendell and Aragorn's true love.
Cate Blanchett as Galadriel: The Elven-Queen of Lothlórien, who discusses Middle-earth's future with Elrond.
Sean Bean as Boromir: Faramir's older brother and a fallen member of the Fellowship who appears in flashbacks since his death, more prominently in the film's extended edition.
Craig Parker as Haldir: The leader of the Lórien Elves sent by Elrond and Galadriel to defend Helm's Deep.
John Leigh as Háma: The loyal doorwarden of the Golden Hall and a majordomo of Théoden.
Bruce Hopkins as Gamling: Théoden's chief lieutenant and a skilled member of the Royal Guard of Rohan.
John Bach as Madril: Faramir's closest aide, who informs him of battle preparations.
Nathaniel Lees as Ugluk: The leader of the band of Uruk-hai who kidnapped Merry and Pippin.The following appear only in the Extended Edition
John Noble as Denethor: The corrupt Steward of Gondor and the father of Boromir and Faramir.In the Battle of Helm's Deep, Peter Jackson has a cameo appearance as one of the men on top of the gate, throwing a spear at the attacking Uruk-hai. His children and Elijah Wood's sister cameo as young refugees in the caves behind the Hornburg, and Alan Lee and Dan Hennah also cameo as soldiers preparing for the battle. The son of a producer's friend, Hamish Duncan, appears as a reluctant young Rohirrim warrior. Daniel Falconer has a cameo as an Elvish archer at the battle.


== Comparison to the source material ==

Screenwriters did not originally script The Two Towers as its own film; The Lord of the Rings trilogy was initially written as a two-part series to be produced by Miramax, with parts of The Two Towers written as the conclusion to The Fellowship of the Ring. The two films became a trilogy under New Line, and writers Jackson, Walsh and Boyens shuffled their scripts. 
The most distinct difference from the book by J.R.R. Tolkien is its structure. Tolkien's The Two Towers is split into two parts, opening with the war in Rohan, and concluding with focus on the journey of Frodo and Sam. The film omits the book's opening, Boromir's death, which was used as a linear climax at the end of The Fellowship of the Ring. Where the book ends with the Fellowship going to Isengard and Frodo's confrontation with Shelob, the film climaxes with the Battle of Helm's Deep, leaving the aforementioned scenes for the film adaptation of The Return of the King. This was done partly to fit more closely the timeline indicated by the book.
In the film, Théoden is possessed by Saruman, whereas in the book he is depicted as depressed and deluded by Wormtongue. Afterwards, in the film, Théoden is still unsure of what to do, and flees to Helm's Deep. In the book he rides out to war, only ending up besieged when he considers helping Erkenbrand. Erkenbrand does not exist in the films: his character is combined with Éomer as the Rohirrim general who arrives with Gandalf at the film's end. Éomer himself is present during the entire battle in the book.
On the way to Helm's Deep, the refugees from Edoras are attacked by Wargs, similar to a scene in The Fellowship of the Ring where the Fellowship battles a group of Wargs. Here, a new subplot is created where Aragorn falls over a cliff, and is assumed to be dead; Jackson stated that he added it to create tension. This scene also resonates with a new subplot regarding Arwen, where she decides to leave Middle-earth after losing hope in the long-term possibilities of her love. In the book, Arwen's role is primarily recorded in the Appendices, and she is never depicted as considering such an act.
A larger change was originally planned: Arwen and Elrond would visit Galadriel, and Arwen would accompany an army of Elves to Helm's Deep to fight alongside Aragorn. During shooting, the script changed, both from writers coming up with better ideas to portray the romance between Aragorn and Arwen, as well as poor fan reaction. The new scene of Arwen leaving for the West was created, and the conversation scene remains, edited to be a flashback to a conversation between them in Rivendell, on the evening before the Fellowship's departure. A conversation between Elrond and Galadriel in Lothlórien was edited to be a telepathic one. Nonetheless, one major change (already filmed) remained that could not be reversed: the Elven warriors fighting at Helm's Deep, although Jackson and Boyens found this romantic and stirring and a reference to how, in the Appendices of The Return of the King, Galadriel and the Elves of Lothlórien, and Thranduil of Mirkwood were first attacked by an army out of Dol Guldur in Mirkwood, and then later counter-attacked and assaulted the fortress itself.Another change is the fact Treebeard does not immediately decide to go to war. This adds to the tension, and Boyens describes it as making Merry and Pippin "more than luggage". Here, the Hobbits show Treebeard what Saruman has done to the forest, prompting his decision to act. Another structural change is that the Hobbits meet Gandalf the White early on, explaining why the Hobbits do not react to his return when they meet him again following Isengard's destruction. This was explained in the book by Gandalf arriving at Isengard in the middle of the night to talk to Treebeard.
The filmmakers' decision to leave Shelob for the third film meant that Faramir had to become an obstacle for Frodo and Sam. In the book, Faramir (like Aragorn) quickly recognises the Ring as a danger and a temptation, and does not hesitate long before letting Frodo and Sam go. In the film, Faramir first decides that the Ring shall go to Gondor and his father Denethor, as a way to prove his worth. In the film, Faramir takes Frodo, Sam and the Ring to the Battle of Osgiliath—they do not go there in the book. Jackson winks to readers with Sam's line, "By all rights we shouldn't even be here, but we are." After seeing how strongly the Ring affects Frodo during the Nazgûl attack, Faramir changes his mind and lets them go. These changes reshape the book's contrast between Faramir and Boromir, who in The Fellowship of the Ring attempted to take the Ring for himself. On the other hand, (which can be seen only in the film's extended version), it is actually their father who wants the Ring and urges Boromir to get it, while Faramir only wants to prove himself to his father. Boyens contends these plot changes were needed to keep the Ring menacing. Wenham commented on the DVD documentaries that he had not read the book prior to reading the script, so the film's version of Faramir was the Faramir he knew. When he later read the book and noticed the major difference, he approached the writers about it, and they explained to him that if he did say "I wouldn't pick that thing up even if it lay by the wayside", it would basically strip the One Ring of all corruptive power.The meaning of the title itself, 'The Two Towers', was changed. While Tolkien considered several possible sets of towers he eventually created a final cover illustration and wrote a note included at the end of The Fellowship of the Ring which identified them as Minas Morgul and Orthanc. Jackson's film names them as Orthanc and Barad-dûr, symbolic of an evil alliance out to destroy Men that forms the film's plot point. The film depicted Saruman openly presenting himself outright as Sauron's servant, whereas this association was not explicitly stated in the novel (and indeed analysis by Gandalf and Aragorn in the chapter "The White Rider" stated that there was a rivalry instead, as Saruman was afraid of the prospect of being at war with Sauron, if Rohan and Gondor fell).


== Production ==


=== Production design ===
When Alan Lee joined the project in late 1997, Helm's Deep was the first structure he was tasked to design. At 1:35 scale, it was one of the first miniatures built for the film, and was part of the 45-minute video that sold the project to New Line. It was primarily drawn from an illustration Lee had once done for the book, though the curved wall featured in the film was proposed by fellow illustrator and designer John Howe. Used in the film for wide shots, Jackson also used this miniature to plan the battle, using 40,000 toy soldiers.Helm's Deep, a pivotal part of the film's narrative, was built at Dry Creek Quarry with its gate, a ramp, and a wall, which included a removable section as well as the tower on a second level. A 1:4-scale miniature of Helm's Deep that ran 50 feet (15 m) wide was used for forced perspective shots, as well as the major explosion sequence.The film explores the armies of Middle-earth. John Howe was the basic designer of the evil forces of Middle Earth, with the Uruk-hai being the first army approved by Jackson. Howe also designed a special crossbow for the Uruk-Hai characters, which was significant because it did not require external tools to rearm. This design was the realisation of a 16th-century manuscript. Also created were 100 Elven suits of armour, for which emphasis was placed on Autumnal colours due to the theme of Elves leaving Middle-earth. Two hundred and fifty suits were also made for the Rohirrim. The designs for Rohan were based on Germanic and Anglo-Saxon patterns, with most of the weapons designed by John Howe and forged by Peter Lyon. Each sword took 3 to 6 days to make.The exterior of the Rohirrim's capital of Edoras, including its thatched roofs, took six months to build on Mount Sunday. The interior of the buildings doubled as offices and lunch halls. The interior of the Hall of Edoras was filmed at Stone Street Studios with tapestries designed by Lee, and Théoden's wooden throne was partly created by his daughter. Hill endured heavy make-up for the possession scene where his skin was pulled back and released for increased wrinkles. Dourif shaved off his eyebrows and put potato flakes as dandruff in his hair for unnerving effect.
Through Frodo and Sam's story, the film also provides a look at Mordor and Gondor. Barad-dûr is fully seen in a tracking shot, a design which Howe called a mockery of Gothic Cathedrals. He and Lee created the Black Gate (though a typo in the script made the miniature into two) and Osgiliath, a ruined city reflecting London during the Blitz or Berlin in 1945. The set on a backlot was based around a bridge and reused some of Moria.


=== Principal photography ===
The Two Towers shared principal photography with The Fellowship of the Ring and The Return of the King. The trilogy was filmed between 11 October 1999 and 22 December 2000. The scenes which take place in Rohan were shot earlier in the production, during which time Viggo Mortensen, Orlando Bloom and John Rhys-Davies's stunt double Brett Beattie sustained many injuries. Mortensen broke two toes when he kicked an Orc helmet while filming the scene in which he, Legolas, and Gimli find the remains of the Uruk-hai and believing Merry and Pippin to be dead (a shot which is included in the film). Furthermore, during filming Bloom fell off his horse and cracked three ribs, and Beattie dislocated his knee. These injuries led to the actors suffering two days of pain during the running sequence in the first act of the film, leading Jackson to jokingly refer to them as "The Walking Wounded."The filming of the Battle of Helm's Deep took approximately three months, with most of the nighttime shots handled by John Mahaffie. Some injuries were sustained during the filming of the sequence, including Mortensen chipping his tooth, and Bernard Hill's ear getting slashed. The sequence also features 500 extras, who insulted each other in Māori, and improvised scenes such as the Uruk-hai stamping their spears before the beginning of the battle. However, there was alleged annoyance among the film's crew for the strength of the gates, which were claimed to be too reinforced during the Battering Ram scene. Mortensen greatly respected the stunt team, and head butted them often as a sign of that respect.Wood and Astin were joined by Serkis on 13 April 2000.


=== Special effects ===
As with The Fellowship of the Ring, Jim Rygiel served as the visual effects supervisor for The Two Towers, while newcomer Joe Letteri joined the visual effects team to supervise Andy Serkis's motion capture performance in the creation of the character Gollum. During the production of The Two Towers Weta Digital doubled their staff members of 260. In total, they would produce 73 minutes of digital effects with 799 shots. The film would feature their first challenge in creating a battle scene, as well as creating two digital characters who needed to act rather than be a set piece, unlike the previous film's Cave Troll and Balrog.
GollumWeta began animating Gollum in late 1998 to convince New Line they could achieve the effect. Andy Serkis "played" Gollum by providing his voice and movements on set, as well as performing within the motion capture suit later on. His scenes were filmed twice, with and without him. Originally, Gollum was set to solely be a CGI character, but Jackson was so impressed by Serkis' audition tape that they used him on set as well.
Gollum's CGI model was also redesigned during 2001 when Serkis was cast as Sméagol, Gollum's former self, so as to give the impression Andy Serkis as Sméagol transforms into the CGI Gollum. The original model can still be glimpsed briefly in the first film. Over Christmas 2001, the crew proceeded to reanimate all the previous shots accordingly within two months. Another problem was that the crew realised that the cast performed better in the takes which physically included Serkis. In the end, the CGI Gollum was rotoscoped and animated on top of these scenes.
Serkis's motion capture was generally used to animate Gollum's body, except for some difficult shots such as him crawling upside down. Gollum's face was animated manually, often using recordings of Serkis as a guide. Gino Acevedo supervised realistic skin tones, which took four hours per frame to render.While the novel alludes to a division within his mind, the film depicts him as having a split personality. The two personas—the childlike Sméagol and the evil Gollum—are established during a scene in which they argue over remaining loyal to Frodo. The two personalities talk to each other, as established by contrasting camera angles and by Serkis altering his voice and physicality for each persona.

TreebeardTreebeard took between 28 and 48 hours per frame to render. For scenes where he interacts with Merry and Pippin, a 14-foot-tall puppet was built on a wheel. Weta took urethane moulds of tree bark and applied them to the sculpt of Treebeard to create his wooden skin. Dominic Monaghan and Billy Boyd sat on bicycle seats concealed into Treebeard's hands to avoid discomfort and were left alone on set sitting in the puppet's hands during breaks. The puppet was shot against bluescreen.


=== Score ===

The musical score for The Two Towers was composed, orchestrated, and conducted by Howard Shore, who also composed the music for the other two films in the series. While the scores for its predecessor and sequel won the Academy Award for Best Score, the soundtrack for The Two Towers was not nominated. Initially there was confusion over the score's eligibility due to a new rule applying to sequels, but the academy did declare it eligible.The score features The London Philharmonic Orchestra, London Voices, The London Oratory School Schola and several vocal and instrumental soloists, including soprano Isabel Bayrakdarian, and Irish fiddler and violinist Dermot Crehan, who also performed on the Hardanger fiddle, which is used in this film in conjunction with the various Rohan themes.
The funeral song Éowyn sings during her cousin Théodred's entombment in the extended edition is styled to be a traditional song of the Rohirrim, and has lyrics in their language, Rohirric (represented by Old English). The song does not appear in the book, and the tune is a variation upon a theme of the rímur Icelandic folk tradition; it can be heard as part of track 7 in the 1999 recording of a musical version of the Edda by Sequentia.The soundtrack was recorded at Abbey Road Studios. The soundtrack has a picture of Peter Jackson (barefoot), the composer, and two producers crossing Abbey Road, referencing The Beatles' album of the same name.


== Release ==


=== Marketing ===
The teaser trailer premiered in theaters on 3 July 2002 with the release of Men in Black II. The theatrical trailer was then released theatrically on 4 October 2002 with the debut of Red Dragon.


=== Home media ===


==== VHS and DVD ====
The Two Towers was released on VHS and DVD on 26 August 2003 in the United States. The date was originally intended to be a simultaneous worldwide release, but due to a bank holiday weekend in the United Kingdom, some British outlets began selling DVDs as much as four days earlier, much to the ire of the UK distributor, Entertainment in Video, which had threatened to withhold advance supplies of subsequent DVD releases. During its first five days of release, the DVD release sold over 3.5 million units. The film also generated $22.8 million in rentals, breaking The Bourne Identity's record for having the biggest rentals of any DVD release. By December 2003, it was reported that The Two Towers sold 16.4 million copies and earned $305.4 million in sales revenue, becoming the second-highest selling home video release of 2003, after Finding Nemo.As with Fellowship, an extended edition of Two Towers was released on VHS and DVD on 18 November 2003 with 45 minutes of new material, added special effects and music, plus 11 minutes of fan-club credits. The runtime expanded to 235 minutes. The 4-disc DVD set included four commentaries along with hours of supplementary material.
In August 2006, a limited edition was released on DVD, and included both theatrical and extended editions on a double-sided disc along with all-new bonus material.


==== Blu-ray ====
The theatrical Blu-ray version of The Lord of the Rings was released in the United States in April 2010. The individual disc of Two Towers was released in September 2010 with the same special features as the complete trilogy release, minus digital copy.The extended Blu-ray editions were released in the US and Canada in June 2011.Two Towers was released in Ultra HD Blu-ray on 30 November 2020 in the United Kingdom and on 1 December 2020 in the United States, along with the other installments, including both theatrical and extended cuts.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The Two Towers opened in theaters on 18 December 2002. During its opening day, the film grossed $26 million, making it the second-highest opening Wednesday, behind Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace. It earned $62,007,528 in its opening weekend in the US and Canada, becoming the fifth-highest opening weekend of that year, behind Austin Powers in Goldmember, Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets and Spider-Man. This was also the third-highest opening weekend for a New Line Cinema film, trailing only behind Rush Hour 2 and Austin Powers in Goldmember. The film then made $101.5 million during its five-day Wednesday opening.Outside the US and Canada, The Two Towers made $99.4 million from 25 territories during its opening weekend, which made it the highest international opening weekend. The combined total opening weekend gross increased to $189.9 million, making it the highest worldwide opening weekend of all time. The film would hold both records until 2003 when they were given to The Matrix Reloaded and its successor The Matrix Revolutions respectively. The Two Towers set opening day records in Germany, Austria, Finland, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Belgium, Sweden and Norway, as well as a single-day record in Denmark. It then made opening weekend records in the United Kingdom, Spain, France, Mexico, Norway, Switzerland, Denmark, Germany and South Korea.The film went on to gross $339,789,881 in North America and $596,899,854 internationally for a worldwide total of $936,689,735 against a budget of $94 million. The Two Towers was the highest-grossing film of 2002 worldwide. Box Office Mojo estimates over 57 million sold tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.Through re-releases in 2003, 2011, 2017, 2019, 2020 and 2021, the film has grossed an additional $2,761,484 in the United States and Canada, and $8,043,876 overseas for a combined total of $10,805,360. This brings overall earnings to $342,952,511 domestic and $604,991,759 international for a worldwide total of $947,944,270.


=== Critical response ===

On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, The Two Towers holds an approval rating of 95% based on 258 reviews, with an average rating of 8.50/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "The Two Towers balances spectacular action with emotional storytelling, leaving audiences both wholly satisfied and eager for the final chapter." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, has assigned the film a score of 87 out of 100 based on 39 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, a grade up from the "A−" earned by the previous film.Like its predecessor, The Two Towers was released to universal critical acclaim and is widely considered to be one of the greatest sequels in cinema history. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three stars out of four, describing it as "one of the most spectacular swashbucklers ever made", and stating "It is not faithful to the spirit of Tolkien and misplaces much of the charm and whimsy of the books, but it stands on its own as a visionary thriller". Nev Pierce for the BBC gave the film four stars out of five, and wrote that while it lacked "the first film's wow-factor", it surpassed The Fellowship of the Ring "in terms of wit, action and narrative drive". Pierce described Gollum as "the first believable CG character" and the Battle of Helm's Deep as "one of the finest, most expansive combat sequences ever filmed". Writing for The Observer, Philip French described The Two Towers as a "stunning visual epic". French commended the battle scenes and the visual style of the film, relating it to the paintings of "Caspar David Friedrich, the Pre-Raphaelites, Art Nouveau illustrations for children's books, and the apocalyptic biblical landscapes ... of the Victorian visionary John Martin". He concluded the review looking forward to the release of the final chapter, writing "This is likely to be happier, more decisive and infinitely more satisfying than anything that will happen to our world in the next 12 months."Joe Morgenstern for The Wall Street Journal lauded the narrative construction of The Two Towers: "Elaborate preparations are required for the payoff in this installment -- the massing of troops plus much individual struggle as splintered groups of the Fellowship make their separate ways toward the defining battle of Helm's Deep ... Yet these preparations count as payoffs too ... Seldom has a popular entertainment set its stage so carefully or evocatively, with such lavish respect for its audience." Morgenstern also highlighted the digital effects and the battle scenes, and said of the series "The Lord of the Rings continues to stake its singular claim on movie history; it's a gift of epic proportions." In his review for the Evening Standard, Alexander Walker wrote that the Battle of Helm's Deep was "probably the greatest battlepiece composed for the screen since Eisenstein's Ivan the Terrible", and that with The Two Towers the trilogy had achieved "a majestic proportion, chivalric and quixotic, earthly and magical, an experience that reaches beyond the dimensions of the cinema screen and somehow reflects the global unease of the world in the first years of the 21st century".In his review for Newsweek, David Ansen commended Jackson's direction of the battle scenes, writing "Few people can stage a battle -- and the eyepopping siege of Helms Deep is one of the most spectacular you'll ever see -- with such sweep and clarity that the carnage doesn't seem an oppressive end in itself". Ansen also praised the complexity of the character of Gollum, commenting "While everyone else in Tolkien's myth falls neatly into the camps of Good and Evil, the self-lacerating Gollum is at war with himself. In an epic drenched in medievalism, he's the dangerously ambiguous voice of the modern." Caroline Westbrook, for Empire, gave the film five stars out of five, and wrote "It may lack the first-view-thrill and natural dramatic shape of Fellowship, but this is both funnier and darker than the first film, and certainly more action-packed. An essential component of what is now destined to be among the best film franchises of all time." Westbrook lauded Jackson's ability to temper the spectacular scenes "with some heartstring-tugging moments - peasants despondent as they are forced to abandon their villages, Aragorn and Arwen's troubled relationship, and, of course, the return of Gandalf (Sir Ian McKellen, superb as ever), one of the film's most powerful, memorable images that may well leave Ring devotees a little misty-eyed."A less enthusiastic review was written in The Guardian by Peter Bradshaw, who had already written a mixed review of The Fellowship of the Ring. Bradshaw gave The Two Towers three stars out of five, appreciating it as "a very watchable, distinctive, if over-extended FX spectacle". However, he commented that the film could not be taken as "a serious evocation of good and evil", and dismissed the subject as "lots and lots of interminable nerdish nonsense".The Battle of Helm's Deep has been named by CNN as one of the greatest screen battles of all time, while Gollum was named as the third favourite computer-generated film character by Entertainment Weekly in 2007.


=== Accolades ===

Academy AwardsWinner: Best Visual Effects (Jim Rygiel, Joe Letteri, Randall William Cook and Alex Funke) and Best Sound Editing (Ethan Van der Ryn and Michael Hopkins).
Nominee: Best Picture (Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, Stephen Sinclair and Peter Jackson, producers), Best Art Direction (Art Direction: Grant Major; Set Decoration: Dan Hennah and Alan Lee), Best Film Editing (Michael J. Horton) and Best Sound (Christopher Boyes, Michael Semanick, Michael Hedges and Hammond Peek).
British Academy Film Awards: Best Costume Design, Best Special Visual Effects, Orange Film of the Year (voted on by the public)
Empire Awards: Best Picture
Grammy Awards: Best Score (Howard Shore)
Hugo Awards (World Science Fiction Society): Best Dramatic Presentation — Long Form
2003 MTV Movie Awards: Best virtual performance (Gollum)
Saturn Awards: Best Fantasy Film, Best Costume (Ngila Dickson), Best Supporting Actor (Andy Serkis)


=== American Film Institute Recognition ===
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
"My precious." – #85


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers at IMDb 
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers at AllMovie 
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers at Box Office Mojo 
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers at Metacritic 
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers at Rotten Tomatoes12 Years a Slave (film)
2000X
2002 in film
2003 MTV Movie Awards
29th Saturn Awards
56th British Academy Film Awards
60th Golden Globe Awards
75th Academy Awards
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Elbereth Gilthoniel
A Few Good Men
A History of Violence
A Map of Middle-earth
A Walking Song
Abbey Road
Abbey Road, London
Abbey Road Studios
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Sound Editing
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Academy Awards
Adaptations of The Lord of the Rings
Addiction to power in The Lord of the Rings
Adventure film
Adventures in Middle-earth
Aladdin (1992 Disney film)
Alan Lee (illustrator)
Alex Funke
Alfonso Cuarón
Alice in Wonderland (2010 film)
Alien (film)
AllMovie
Almost Famous
American Beauty (1999 film)
Ancestry as guide to character in Tolkien's legendarium
Andrew Lesnie
Andrew Stanton
Andy Serkis
Aragorn
Architecture in Middle-earth
Argo (2012 film)
Arrival (film)
Art Nouveau
Arwen
Astra Lost in Space
Audio commentary
Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery
Austin Powers in Goldmember
Avatar (2009 film)
Avengers: Endgame
BAFTA Award for Best Cinematography
BAFTA Award for Best Costume Design
BAFTA Award for Best Direction
BAFTA Award for Best Editing
BAFTA Award for Best Film
BAFTA Award for Best Makeup and Hair
BAFTA Award for Best Production Design
BAFTA Award for Best Sound
BAFTA Award for Best Special Visual Effects
BBC
Babe (film)
Babylon 5
Back-to-back film production
Back to the Future
Bad Taste
Bag End
Balin (Middle-earth)
Balrog
Bank holiday
Barad-dûr
Barbara Remington
Bark (botany)
Barrie M. Osborne
Barrow-wight
Batman Begins
Battle of Helm's Deep
Battle of the Hornburg
Battle of the Morannon
Battle of the Pelennor Fields
Beasts of the Southern Wild
Beauty and the Beast (2017 film)
Before the Devil Knows You're Dead
Being John Malkovich
Benh Zeitlin
Beorn
Beowulf and Middle-earth
Beren and Lúthien
Bernard Hill
Bilbo's Last Song
Bilbo Baggins
Billy Boyd (actor)
Black Panther (film)
Blade Runner
Blu-ray
Bodacious Space Pirates
Boogie Nights
Bored of the Rings
Born of Hope
Boromir
Box Office Mojo
Brad Dourif
Braindead (film)
Braveheart
Brazil (1985 film)
Bree, Middle-earth
Brendan McCarthy
British Board of Film Classification
Bruce Hopkins (actor)
CBS Interactive
CNN
Cameo appearance
Canada
Canterbury Region
Casino Royale (2006 film)
Caspar David Friedrich
Cate Blanchett
Character pairing in The Lord of the Rings
Charly (1968 film)
Chicago Sun-Times
Chicago Tribune
Christianity in Middle-earth
Christina Scull
Christopher Boyes
Christopher Lee
Christopher Nolan
Chroma key
Cinderella (2015 American film)
CinemaScore
Cirith Ungol
Concerning Hobbits
Cowboy Bebop
Craig Parker
Crash (2004 film)
Crossing the Line (2008 film)
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon
DVD
DVD-Video
Dan Hennah
Dandruff
Daniel Falconer
Daniels (directors)
David Ansen
David Wenham
Dead Marshes
Death and immortality in Middle-earth
Decline and fall in Middle-earth
Denethor
Denis Villeneuve
Dennō Coil
Der Herr der Ringe
Differences between The Lord of the Rings book and film series
Dissociative identity disorder
District 9
Doc Savage: The Man of Bronze
Doctor Who
Dol Guldur
Dominic Monaghan
Douglas A. Anderson
Dragonheart
Drúedain
Dune (2021 film)
Dwarf (Middle-earth)
Dwarves in Middle-earth
Déagol
Dúnedain
Eagles in Middle-earth
Economy of Middle-earth
Edda
Edoras
Edward Scissorhands
Elendor
Elf (Middle-earth)
Elijah Wood
Elrond
Elves in Middle-earth
Empire (film magazine)
Empire Award for Best Film
Emyn Muil
Enchanted (film)
England in Middle-earth
Ensemble cast
Ent
Entertainment Film Distributors
Entertainment Weekly
Environmentalism in The Lord of the Rings
Epic film
Eric Heisserer
Errantry
Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind
Ethan Van der Ryn
Evening Standard
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Explosives
Fandango Media
Fangorn
Fantasy film
Faramir
Fastitocalon (poem)
Fellowship!
Figwit
Film score
Finding Nemo
Forced perspective
Forests in Middle-earth
Forgotten Silver
Forrest Gump
Fran Walsh
Frequency (2000 film)
Frodo Baggins
Galadriel
Galaxy Quest
Game of Thrones
Game of Thrones (season 1)
Gamera: Guardian of the Universe
Gamera 2: Attack of Legion
Gandalf
Gene Wilder
Geography of Middle-earth
George Lucas
George Miller (filmmaker)
Get Out
Ghost (1990 film)
Ghostbusters
Gimli (Middle-earth)
Girls und Panzer der Film
Gladiator (2000 film)
Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery
Glorfindel
Godzilla Singular Point
Goldberry
Golden Globe Award for Best Director
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Gollum
Gondor
Gondor: The Siege of Minas Tirith
Good Omens (TV series)
Gosford Park
Grammy Award
Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media
Grant Major
Gravity (2013 film)
Gríma Wormtongue
Guardians of Middle-earth
Guardians of the Galaxy (film)
Guillermo del Toro
Gunbuster
Gunparade March
Half-elf
Hammond Peek
Harad
Hardanger fiddle
Harlan Ellison
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (film)
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (film)
Hayao Miyazaki
Heaven Can Wait (1978 film)
Heavenly Creatures
Helm's Deep
Her (film)
Heraldry of Middle-earth
Heroism in The Lord of the Rings
Hidden Figures
Hobbit
Hobitit
Hordes of the Things (radio series)
Houghton Mifflin
Howard Shore
Howl's Moving Castle (film)
Hugo Award
Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation
Hugo Weaving
Humphrey Carpenter
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I See Fire
Ian McKellen
Iceland
Impression of depth in The Lord of the Rings
In Dreams (Howard Shore song)
Inception
Interlacing in The Lord of the Rings
Interstellar (film)
Into the West (song)
Into the Woods (film)
Isabel Bayrakdarian
Isengard
Ivan the Terrible (1944 film)
J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. II: The Two Towers
J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I (1990 video game)
J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I (1994 video game)
J. Michael Straczynski
J. R. R. Tolkien
J. R. R. Tolkien's Riders of Rohan
J. R. R. Tolkien's influences
J. R. R. Tolkien: Artist and Illustrator
Jac Schaeffer
Jack Brown Genius
James Cameron
James Gunn
James Schamus
Jim Reardon
Jim Rygiel
Joe Letteri
Joe Morgenstern
John Bach
John Howe (illustrator)
John Leigh (actor)
John Martin (painter)
John Noble
John Rhys-Davies
Jonás Cuarón
Jordan Peele
Joss Whedon
Jurassic Park (film)
Kamen Rider Kuuga
Karl Urban
Kemono Friends
Kevin Conway (actor)
Khraniteli
King Kong (2005 film)
Knives Out
L.A. Confidential (film)
Ladyhawke (film)
Languages constructed by J. R. R. Tolkien
Led Zeppelin
Lego The Hobbit (video game)
Lego The Lord of the Rings
Lego The Lord of the Rings (video game)
Legolas
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Life of Pi (film)
List of accolades received by The Hobbit film series
List of accolades received by The Lord of the Rings film series
List of films considered the best
List of highest-grossing films
List of original characters in The Hobbit film series
List of original characters in The Lord of the Rings film series
List of weapons and armour in Middle-earth
Literary devices in The Lord of the Rings
Literary reception of The Lord of the Rings
Little Shop of Horrors (1986 film)
Liv Tyler
London Oratory School Schola
London Philharmonic Orchestra
London Voices
Lord of the Rings: Game One
Lord of the Rings (board game)
Lord of the Rings (musical)
Los Angeles Times
Lothlorien
Lothlórien
Luck and fate in Middle-earth
Lucy Alibar
M. Night Shyamalan
MTV
MTV Movie Award for Movie of the Year
Macross Frontier
Mad Max: Fury Road
Magic in Middle-earth
Magnolia (film)
Maiar in Middle-earth
Mama wa Shōgaku 4 Nensei
Margrethe II of Denmark
Martian Successor Nadesico: The Motion Picture – Prince of Darkness
May It Be
Meet the Feebles
Mel Brooks
Memento (film)
Men in Black (1997 film)
Men in Black II
Men in Middle-earth
Menace II Society
Mental illness in Middle-earth
Meriadoc Brandybuck
Merry Brandybuck
Metacritic
Metropolis (1927 film)
Michael Hedges (sound engineer)
Michael J. Horton
Michael Schur
Michael Semanick
Middle-earth
Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor
Middle-earth: Shadow of War
Middle-earth Collectible Card Game
Middle-earth Enterprises
Middle-earth Role Playing
Middle-earth Strategy Battle Game
Middle-earth artists
Middle-earth in film
Middle-earth in motion pictures
Middle-earth in video games
Middle-earth peoples
Middle Earth (board game)
Mike Hopkins (sound editor)
Minas Morgul
Minor places in Middle-earth
Miramax
Miranda Otto
Mirkwood
Misty Mountain Hop
Mithril
Moon (2009 film)
Moonlight (2016 film)
Mordor
Moria, Middle-earth
Moria (Middle-earth)
Mortal Engines (film)
Motion capture
Mudbound (film)
Muddle Earth
Mulholland Drive (film)
Music Inspired by Lord of the Rings (Bo Hansson album)
Music of Middle-earth
Music of The Hobbit film series
Music of The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power
Music of The Lord of the Rings film series
My Neighbor Totoro
Māori language
Naming of weapons in Middle-earth
Namárië
Napoleon Dynamite
Narrative structure of The Lord of the Rings
Nathaniel Lees
Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (film)
Nazgûl
Nebraska (film)
Nebula Award for Best Script
Neil Gaiman
Neill Blomkamp
New Line Cinema
New York City
New Zealand
Newsweek
Ngila Dickson
Nico Lathouris
Nicole Perlman
Night of the Living Dead
Nightbreed
Nine (2009 live-action film)
No Country for Old Men
Nomadland
Non-narrative elements in The Lord of the Rings
Northern courage in Middle-earth
Oak Knoll Books
Oh, God! (film)
Old English
Old Forest
Old Man Willow
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
One Ring
Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Ensemble
Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Picture
Oppenheimer (film)
Orc
Orlando Bloom
Oxonmoot
Pacific Rim (film)
Paganism in Middle-earth
Palantír
Pan's Labyrinth
Parasite (2019 film)
Park Road Post
Pauline Baynes
Peregrin Took
Pete Docter
Peter Bradshaw
Peter Jackson
Peter Jackson's interpretation of The Lord of the Rings
Peter King (make-up artist)
Peter Owen
Phantasm (film)
Phil Lord and Christopher Miller
Philip French
Philippa Boyens
Philology and Middle-earth
Picturing Tolkien
Pippin Took
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
Planetes
Plants in Middle-earth
Poetry in The Lord of the Rings
Polyurethane
Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood
Production of The Lord of the Rings film series
Proverbs in The Lord of the Rings
Psychological journeys of Middle-earth
Puella Magi Madoka Magica
Pulp Fiction
Quenya
Quests in Middle-earth
Radagast
Raiders of the Lost Ark
Ramble On
Randall William Cook
Ray Bradbury Award
Recordings of the music for The Lord of the Rings film series
Red Dragon (2002 film)
Rendering (computer graphics)
Requiem for a Tower
Review aggregator
Richard Clark (director)
Richard Taylor (filmmaker)
Rings of Power
Risk: The Lord of the Rings Trilogy Edition
Rivendell
Robert Gordon (screenwriter)
Rodney Rothman
Roger Ebert
Rogue One
Rohan, Middle-earth
Rohan (Middle-earth)
Rohirric
Roma (2018 film)
Rotoscoping
Rotten Tomatoes
Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise
Rush Hour 2
Rímur
SSSS.Gridman
Sagan om ringen (1971 film)
Samwise Gamgee
Saruman
Satellite Award for Best Cast – Motion Picture
Saturn Award for Best Actor
Saturn Award for Best Costume Design
Saturn Award for Best DVD or Blu-ray Special Edition Release
Saturn Award for Best Director
Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film
Saturn Award for Best Make-up
Saturn Award for Best Music
Saturn Award for Best Performance by a Younger Actor
Saturn Award for Best Special Effects
Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor
Saturn Award for Best Writing
Sauron
Sauron (game)
Saving Private Ryan
Scream (1996 film)
Scream VI
Sean Astin
Sean Bean
Seiun Award
Sequel
Sequentia (music group)
Serenity (2005 film)
Seven (1995 film)
Sexuality in The Lord of the Rings
Shadows of Mordor
Shakespeare's influence on Tolkien
Shelob
Shin Godzilla
Shrek
Sideways
Sin City (film)
Sindarin
Skyfall
Sleeper (1973 film)
Solaris (1972 film)
Something Wicked This Way Comes (film)
Somewhere in Time (film)
Song of Eärendil
Sony BMG
Sound and language in Middle-earth
Soylent Green
Space Battleship Yamato
Space Battleship Yamato 2199: Odyssey of the Celestial Ark
Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse
Spider-Man: No Way Home
Spider-Man (2002 film)
Spider-Man 2
Spirit possession
Spotlight (film)
Stanley R. Greenberg
Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones
Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace
Star Wars: The Force Awakens
Star Wars: The Last Jedi
Star Wars (film)
Stardust (2007 film)
State and Main
Stephen Sinclair
Stewards of Gondor
Summer Wars
Superman II: The Richard Donner Cut
Superman Returns
Symphony No. 1 "The Lord of the Rings"
Tauriel
Teaser trailer
Ted Nasmith
Telepathy
Terminator 2: Judgment Day
Terri Tatchell
The Adventures of Tintin (film)
The Adventures of Tom Bombadil
The Andromeda Strain (film)
The Avengers (2012 film)
The Battle of Evermore
The Beatles
The Beatles: Get Back
The Blitz
The Bourne Identity (2002 film)
The Bourne Supremacy (film)
The Bourne Ultimatum (film)
The Boy Who Could Fly
The Children of Húrin
The Council of Elrond
The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (film)
The Dark Crystal
The Dark Knight
The Departed
The Doctor's Wife
The Empire Strikes Back
The Fall of Gondolin
The Fault in Our Stars (film)
The Favourite
The Fellowship of the Ring
The Frighteners
The Girl Who Leapt Through Time (2006 film)
The Golden Voyage of Sinbad
The Good Place
The Grand Budapest Hotel
The Great War and Middle-earth
The Guardian
The Help (film)
The History of Middle-earth
The History of The Hobbit
The Hobbit
The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey
The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies
The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug
The Hobbit (1967 film)
The Hobbit (1977 film)
The Hobbit (1985 film)
The Hobbit (film series)
The Holes
The Hunger Games: Catching Fire
The Hunt for Gollum
The Hurt Locker
The Incredibles
The Jungle Book (2016 film)
The Last Ringbearer
The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien
The Long and Short of It
The Lord of the Rings
The Lord of the Rings: Aragorn's Quest
The Lord of the Rings: Conquest
The Lord of the Rings: Gollum
The Lord of the Rings: Journey to Rivendell
The Lord of the Rings: Return to Moria
The Lord of the Rings: Tactics
The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth
The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II
The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-king
The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (soundtrack)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (video game)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (soundtrack)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (video game)
The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power
The Lord of the Rings: The Third Age
The Lord of the Rings: The Third Age (Game Boy Advance)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (soundtrack)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (video game)
The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim
The Lord of the Rings: War in the North
The Lord of the Rings: War of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings (1955 radio series)
The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)
The Lord of the Rings (1979 radio series)
The Lord of the Rings (1981 radio series)
The Lord of the Rings (film series)
The Lord of the Rings Motion Picture Trilogy: The Exhibition
The Lord of the Rings Online
The Lord of the Rings Online: Before the Shadow
The Lord of the Rings Online: Fate of Gundabad
The Lord of the Rings Online: Helm's Deep
The Lord of the Rings Online: Minas Morgul
The Lord of the Rings Online: Mines of Moria
The Lord of the Rings Online: Mordor
The Lord of the Rings Online: Riders of Rohan
The Lord of the Rings Online: Rise of Isengard
The Lord of the Rings Online: Siege of Mirkwood
The Lord of the Rings Online: War of Three Peaks
The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game
The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game
The Lovely Bones (film)
The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late
The Martian (film)
The Matrix
The Matrix Reloaded
The Matrix Revolutions
The Mist (film)
The Muppet Movie
The Nature of Middle-earth
The Nightmare Before Christmas
The Observer
The Old Guard (2020 film)
The One Ring Roleplaying Game
The Power of the Dog (film)
The Princess Bride (film)
The Prisoner
The Return of the King
The Return of the King (1980 film)
The Revenant (2015 film)
The Road Goes Ever On
The Road Goes Ever On (song)
The Scouring of the Shire
The Sea-Bell
The Shadow of the Past
The Shape of Water
The Shire
The Silmarillion
The Sixth Sense
The Social Network
The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen
The Thin Red Line (1998 film)
The Tree of Life (film)
The Trial of the Chicago 7
The Truman Show
The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1
The Twilight Saga: Eclipse
The Twilight Saga: New Moon
The Two Towers
The Two Towers (disambiguation)
The Valley (1976 film)
The Wall Street Journal
Theatrical trailer
Themes of The Lord of the Rings
There's Something About Mary
They're Taking the Hobbits to Isengard
They Shall Not Grow Old
Thranduil
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Théoden
Time in J. R. R. Tolkien's fiction
Titanic (1997 film)
To All the Boys: Always and Forever
Tokusou Sentai Dekaranger
Tolkien's Middle-earth family trees
Tolkien's ambiguity
Tolkien's artwork
Tolkien's frame stories
Tolkien's impact on fantasy
Tolkien's maps
Tolkien's modern sources
Tolkien's monsters
Tolkien's moral dilemma
Tolkien's prose style
Tolkien and race
Tolkien and the Celtic
Tolkien and the Norse
Tolkien and the classical world
Tolkien and the medieval
Tolkien and the modernists
Tolkien fandom
Tolkien research
Tolkienmoot
Tom Bombadil
Toy Story 4
Traffic (2000 film)
Transformers (film)
Translation of The Lord of the Rings into Swedish
Translations of The Lord of the Rings
Translations of The Lord of the Rings into Russian
Treebeard
Trees in Middle-earth
Trolls in Middle-earth
Twilight (2008 film)
UFO (British TV series)
Ultra HD Blu-ray
Ultraman Tiga
Ultraman Z
Uma Thurman
Unfinished Tales
United 93 (film)
United Press International
Uruk-hai
VHS
Valinor
Valley of the Stereos
Variety (magazine)
Viggo Mortensen
Voices of a Distant Star
WALL-E
WandaVision
Wang Hui-ling
War in Middle Earth
War of the Ring (SPI game)
War of the Ring (board game)
Warg
Warg (Middle-earth)
Warner Bros.
Watcher in the Water
Watchmen (film)
Wayback Machine
Wayne G. Hammond
Wedding Crashers
Weighted arithmetic mean
West of Memphis
Weta Digital
Whenever You're Ready (The Good Place)
Who Framed Roger Rabbit
WingNut Films
Witch-king of Angmar
Wizard (Middle-earth)
Wizards in Middle-earth
Women in The Lord of the Rings
Wonder Woman (2017 film)
Woody Allen
Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien
Wētā FX
Wētā Workshop
X-Men: Days of Future Past
YouTube
Young Frankenstein
Yuri Rasovsky
Zeiram
Ziegfeld Theatre (1969)
Éomer
Éowyn
http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/380/380092p1.html
http://members.tripod.com/peter_jackson_online/lotr/articles/20_questions2.htm
http://www.moviehole.net/news/20021205_714.html
http://www.baltimoresun.com/cl-et-burlingame18jan18,0,5723310.story
http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2002&p=.htm
http://www.cnn.com/2007/SHOWBIZ/Movies/03/29/movie.battles/index.html
http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20041669_20041686_20046918_8,00.html
http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/The-Lord-of-the-Rings-The-Motion-Picture-Trilogy-Blu-ray/5174/
http://www.blu-ray.com/news/?id=4787
https://web.archive.org/web/20071011232013/http://moviehole.net/news/20021205_714.html
http://www.eonline.com/news/42411/lotr-fans-get-credit
http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=twotowers.htm&adjust_yr=1&p=.htm
http://www.nbc4.com/atthemovies/2440573/detail.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20070930043956/http://www.baltimoresun.com/cl-et-burlingame18jan18,0,5723310.story
https://web.archive.org/web/20081206153912/http://www.imdb.com/news/sb/2003-08-27
https://web.archive.org/web/20100225150750/http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/The-Lord-of-the-Rings-The-Motion-Picture-Trilogy-Blu-ray/5174/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100626104403/http://www.blu-ray.com/news/?id=4787
https://web.archive.org/web/20110530090916/http://www.amazon.com/Lord-Rings-Picture-Trilogy-Extended/dp/B0026L7H20
https://web.archive.org/web/20081217130020/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2002&p=.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20160605013312/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=twotowers.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20070408081844/http://www.cnn.com/2007/SHOWBIZ/Movies/03/29/movie.battles/index.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20070809074613/http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20041669_20041686_20046918_8,00.html
https://www.amazon.com/Lord-Rings-Picture-Trilogy-Extended/dp/B0026L7H20
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v271070
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4709499-0
http://www.dvdmg.com/lotrtwotowersbree.shtml
https://web.archive.org/web/20170616055925/http://www.dvdmg.com/lotrtwotowersbree.shtml
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0167261/
https://www.imdb.com/news/sb/2003-08-27#film5
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=twotowers.htm
https://viaf.org/viaf/316752098
https://aleph.nkp.cz/F/?func=find-c&local_base=aut&ccl_term=ica=unn2006375060&CON_LNG=ENG
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/the-lord-of-the-rings-the-two-towers
https://www.warnerbros.com/movies/lord-rings-two-towers/
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/lord-of-the-rings-the-two-towers-2002
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q164963#P856
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q164963#P345
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q164963#P1562
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q164963#P1237
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q164963#P1712
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q164963#P1258
https://web.archive.org/web/20090222005531/http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/380/380092p1.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20030901214452/http://www.nbc4.com/atthemovies/2440573/detail.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20180111131247/http://www.eonline.com/news/42411/lotr-fans-get-credit
https://web.archive.org/web/20130512040756/http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/lord-of-the-rings-the-two-towers-2002
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX5130976
https://www.idref.fr/078617715
https://web.archive.org/web/20031207144634/http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/
http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/
https://archive.org/details/lordofringsg00serk/page/24
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0167261/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/53999
https://web.archive.org/web/20190512154657/https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/53999
https://web.archive.org/web/20200517125522/https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0167261/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_lord_of_the_rings_the_two_towers
https://web.archive.org/web/20200517125823/https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_lord_of_the_rings_the_two_towers
https://web.archive.org/web/20200517125917/https://www.metacritic.com/movie/the-lord-of-the-rings-the-two-towers
https://web.archive.org/web/20181220122629/https://www.cinemascore.com/publicsearch/index/title/
https://www.cinemascore.com/publicsearch/index/title/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q164963#identifiers
https://www.filmstories.co.uk/news/lord-of-the-rings-and-the-hobbit-set-for-4k-release-in-december/
https://web.archive.org/web/20201021183914/https://www.filmstories.co.uk/news/lord-of-the-rings-and-the-hobbit-set-for-4k-release-in-december/
http://id.worldcat.org/fast/1397536/
http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/lord-rings-two-towers-2002
https://web.archive.org/web/20180321092838/http://www.bbfc.co.uk/releases/lord-rings-two-towers-2002
http://www.mtv.com/news/2429953/lord-of-the-rings-what-if-uma-thurman-as-eowyn/
https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=Ai8kW0-oe2Y
https://ghostarchive.org/varchive/youtube/20211211/Ai8kW0-oe2Y
https://web.archive.org/web/20170221092537/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ai8kW0-oe2Y&gl=US&hl=en
https://www.bbc.co.uk/stoke/films/reviews/g_m/lotr_the_two_towers_alt.shtml
https://www.standard.co.uk/culture/film/darkness-on-middle-earth-7428288.html
https://www.newsweek.com/and-just-time-christmas-141101
https://www.empireonline.com/movies/reviews/lord-rings-two-towers-review/
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1040337236592860073
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/dec/15/lordoftherings.jrrtolkien
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/dec/14/lordoftherings1
http://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/dec/13/artsfeatures.lordoftherings
https://www.salon.com/2022/01/01/11-actors-nearly-starred-in-the-lord-of-the-rings-franchise_partner/
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007591075005171
https://www.orlandosentinel.com/news/os-xpm-2002-12-21-0212200456-story.html
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-2002-dec-23-et-munoz23-story.html
https://www.upi.com/Odd_News/2002/12/22/Two-Towers-dominates-US-box-office/65301040606355/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220429214429/https://www.upi.com/Odd_News/2002/12/22/Two-Towers-dominates-US-box-office/65301040606355/
https://variety.com/2003/scene/markets-festivals/marvel-ous-x2-opening-1117885660/
https://www.screendaily.com/matrix-reloaded-passes-100m-abroad-in-record-time/4013641.article
https://variety.com/2003/scene/markets-festivals/neo-hobbits-still-at-it-for-global-b-o-mark-1117895414/
https://www.screendaily.com/towering-success-lord-of-the-rings-sequel-goes-international/4011674.article
https://ew.com/article/2003/09/03/two-towers-dvd-breaks-rental-records/
https://variety.com/2003/biz/news/year-end-2003-top-selling-titles-combined-vhs-and-dvd-626828/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220628155427/https://ew.com/article/2003/09/03/two-towers-dvd-breaks-rental-records/
https://movieweb.com/two-towers-and-t3-trailers-are-coming-red-dragon-images-x-men-2-get-a-stryker-plus-much-more/
https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-2002-09-27-0209270377-story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220212181728/https://www.salon.com/2022/01/01/11-actors-nearly-starred-in-the-lord-of-the-rings-franchise_partner/
https://web.archive.org/web/20211008195749/http://www.mtv.com/news/2429953/lord-of-the-rings-what-if-uma-thurman-as-eowyn/
https://web.archive.org/web/20080205212145/http://members.tripod.com/peter_jackson_online/lotr/articles/20_questions2.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20220818174309/https://movieweb.com/two-towers-and-t3-trailers-are-coming-red-dragon-images-x-men-2-get-a-stryker-plus-much-more/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220818174629/https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-2002-09-27-0209270377-story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220628155424/https://variety.com/2003/biz/news/year-end-2003-top-selling-titles-combined-vhs-and-dvd-626828/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220315234739/https://www.orlandosentinel.com/news/os-xpm-2002-12-21-0212200456-story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220315234713/https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-2002-dec-23-et-munoz23-story.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220203173427/https://variety.com/2003/scene/markets-festivals/marvel-ous-x2-opening-1117885660/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220321010254/https://www.screendaily.com/matrix-reloaded-passes-100m-abroad-in-record-time/4013641.article
https://web.archive.org/web/20220504164950/https://variety.com/2003/scene/markets-festivals/neo-hobbits-still-at-it-for-global-b-o-mark-1117895414/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220324181950/https://www.screendaily.com/towering-success-lord-of-the-rings-sequel-goes-international/4011674.article
https://web.archive.org/web/20220211235211/https://www.bbc.co.uk/stoke/films/reviews/g_m/lotr_the_two_towers_alt.shtml
https://web.archive.org/web/20220205013322/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/dec/15/lordoftherings.jrrtolkien
https://web.archive.org/web/20220213165450/https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1040337236592860073
https://web.archive.org/web/20220212010905/https://www.standard.co.uk/culture/film/darkness-on-middle-earth-7428288.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220212015313/https://www.newsweek.com/and-just-time-christmas-141101
https://web.archive.org/web/20220212125256/https://www.empireonline.com/movies/reviews/lord-rings-two-towers-review/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220120064030/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/dec/14/lordoftherings1
https://web.archive.org/web/20220212171253/https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/dec/13/artsfeatures.lordoftherings
https://cantic.bnc.cat/registre/981058515929906706
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/nr2002042474
http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/75th-winners.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20111130043610/http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/75th-winners.html
