The Hollywood Revue
The Hollywood Revue of 1929, or simply The Hollywood Revue, is a 1929 American pre-Code musical comedy film released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. It was the studio's second feature-length musical, and one of their earliest sound films. Produced by Harry Rapf and Irving Thalberg and directed by Charles Reisner, it features nearly all of MGM's stars in a two-hour revue that includes three segments in Technicolor. The masters of ceremonies are Conrad Nagel and Jack Benny.At the 2nd Academy Awards, the film received a Best Picture nomination (its sole nomination) but lost to another Irving Thalberg MGM production, The Broadway Melody.


== Production ==
Unlike M-G-M's imposing feature films, which always boasted strong story values, The Hollywood Revue of 1929 was a plotless parade of variety acts. Conrad Nagel, interviewed for the book The Real Tinsel, recalled, "Everybody thought Harry Rapf was crazy for making it." Billed as an "All-Star Musical Extravaganza", the film includes performances by once and future stars, including Joan Crawford singing and dancing on stage. (She later remarked, "Revue was one of those let's-throw-everyone-on-the-lot-into-a musical things, but I did a good song-and-dance number."). Other segments feature Gus Edwards, John Gilbert, Norma Shearer, Lionel Barrymore, Buster Keaton, Marie Dressler, Bessie Love, Marion Davies, Anita Page, and the comedy team of Karl Dane and George K. Arthur.
Highlights of the film are a comedy routine starring Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy as inept magicians, and a variety of musical performances. One of these is the debut of "Singin' in the Rain", performed initially by Cliff Edwards as "Ukulele Ike,'" and later performed at the end of the film by the entire cast. This latter all-star color sequence was a last-minute addition to the film, shot late at night on June 10, 1929, just ten days before the premiere at Grauman's Chinese Theatre. The only major M-G-M stars missing from the revue are Greta Garbo, Ramon Novarro, and Lon Chaney, although Chaney is referred to by name in one of the songs performed and Garbo is spoken of during one of the introductory dialogues. Only one sequence was cut from the film: three songs by The Brox Sisters, which was recycled into a short subject, Gems of MGM. Another sequence, a parody of the Albertina Rasch ballet's "pearl dance" by Marie Dressler, was planned but not shot (as the film's production records reveal). Instead, the number was replaced by one featuring Buster Keaton, though Dressler did pose for stills wearing a Lady Godiva wig.The film is sometimes cited, as on the DVD release of the 1952 Singin' in the Rain, as the film that led to the downfall of Gilbert's career. Gilbert, a popular silent film actor best known for his work opposite Garbo, possessed a pleasant, tenor speaking voice which did not always match his heroic, dashing screen image. In Hollywood Revue he plays the balcony scene from Romeo and Juliet with Norma Shearer, first straight, then for laughs with contemporary slang. It is possible, though, that the negative effect of the film on Gilbert's career has been overstated, since many contemporary reviews made no criticism of his performance. His problems really began with the next two films he made, His Glorious Night (1929) and Redemption (1930).


== Cast ==


== Musical numbers ==
The circulating print of The Hollywood Revue of 1929 runs as follows:


=== Act I ===
"The Palace of Minstrel" sung and danced by a minstrel chorus
"Masters of Ceremonies" Jack Benny introduces Conrad Nagel. Charles King and Cliff Edwards interfere.
"Got a Feeling for You" sung by Joan Crawford
"Old Folks at Home" sung by chorus
"Old Black Joe" sung by chorus
"Low-Down Rhythm" sung and danced by June Purcell
"Your Mother and Mine" sung by Charles King
"You Were Meant for Me" "sung" by Conrad Nagel (whose voice was dubbed by Charles King) to Anita Page
"Nobody but You" sung by Cliff Edwards
"Your Mother and Mine" played by Jack Benny on his violin with interjections from Karl Dane and George K. Arthur
"Cut Up" comedy skit featuring William Haines ripping up Jack Benny's suit
"I Never Knew I Could Do a Thing Like That" sung by Bessie Love
"For I'm the Queen" sung by Marie Dressler, assisted by Polly Moran
"Magic Act" introduced by Jack Benny, featuring Laurel and Hardy as magicians in a comedy skit (their first appearance in a sound feature film)
"Military March" with Marion Davies singing "Oh, What a Man" and "Tommy Atkins on Parade" followed by military drill and dancing. The Brox Sisters conclude this number singing "Strike Up the Band"


=== Intermission ===
"Nobody But You", "Your Mother and Mine", and "I've Got a Feeling for You" by the orchestra


=== Act II ===
"The Pearl Ballet" sung by James Burrows, danced by Beth Laemmle and the Albertina Rasch ballet
"The Dance of the Sea", an "underwater" dance performed by Buster Keaton
"Lon Chaney's Gonna Get You If You Don't Watch Out" sung by Gus Edwards
"The Adagio Dance" with the Natova Company
"Romeo and Juliet" (in two-color Technicolor) with John Gilbert and Norma Shearer, with Lionel Barrymore as director
"Singin' in the Rain" introduced by Cliff Edwards, with The Brox Sisters
"Charlie, Gus, and Ike" with Charles King, Gus Edwards, and Cliff Edwards
"Marie, Polly, and Bess" with Marie Dressler, Polly Moran, and Bessie Love
"Orange Blossom Time" (in two-color Technicolor), sung by Charles King to Myrtle McLaughlin, danced by the Albertina Rasch Ballet Company
"Singin' in the Rain" (finale) (in two-color Technicolor), sung by entire cast


== Reception ==
The film, which was shot in 25 days with a budget of US$426,000, was popular with audiences and critics alike, especially in its initial big-city engagements. "Brimming over with good fun and catchy music", Mordaunt Hall of The New York Times wrote. Variety called it "the top novelty film to be turned out to date....If the theater booths give it an even break, nothing can stop it." Film Daily reported, "A smash and a wow. Smart revue with plenty of comedy beautifully dressed and a cast that is gilt-edged." John Mosher of The New Yorker called it "the most extravagant and extensive musical comedy so far presented by the talking pictures, and is in itself a complete evening's entertainment."The film went on to make a profit of $1.1 million and was considered for the Academy Award for Best Picture (there were no official nominations at that point in Motion Picture Association of America history). Producer Rapf tried to follow it up with another revue, The Hollywood Revue of 1930, which was changed during production to The March of Time, and finally abandoned. Musical numbers already shot for the film were edited into M-G-M short subjects of the early 1930s.


== Alternate version ==
Some sources list the original running time of Hollywood Revue of 1929 as 130 minutes. At least two sequences in the original roadshow version are missing from current prints: an opening recitation by the showgirls who are seen posing in the "Hollywood Revue" sign after the opening credits, and the appearance of Nils Asther, who assisted Jack Benny in introducing the final "Orange Blossom" number.


== Preservation ==
The film survives intact with its original Technicolor sequences. It was released on laserdisc in the 1990s from MGM/UA Home Video, and on DVD in 2009 through the Warner Archive Collection.


== See also ==
List of early color feature films
List of early sound feature films (1926–1929)
Lionel Barrymore filmography


== References ==


== External links ==
The Hollywood Revue of 1929 at IMDb 
The Hollywood Revue of 1929 at the TCM Movie Database
The Hollywood Revue of 1929 at AllMovie
The Hollywood Revue at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Hollywood Revue of 1929 at Rotten Tomatoes
The Hollywood Revue of 1929 at the International Buster Keaton Society2nd Academy Awards
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Day at the Races (film)
A Free Soul
A Lady's Morals
A Night at the Opera (film)
Academy Award for Best Picture
Al Boasberg
Albertina Rasch
AllMovie
Anita Page
Anna Christie (1930 English-language film)
Arthur Freed
As You Desire Me (film)
Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ (1925 film)
Bessie Love
Billy the Kid (1930 film)
Bombshell (1933 film)
Broadway Melody of 1938
Brotherly Love (1928 film)
Brown of Harvard (1926 film)
Brox Sisters
Buster Keaton
Cameron K. Wood
Camille (1936 film)
Caught Short
Charles King (musical actor)
Charles King (vaudevillian)
Charles Reisner
Chasing Rainbows (1930 film)
China Bound
China Seas (film)
Cliff Edwards
Conrad Nagel
DVD
Divorce in the Family
Eskimo (1933 film)
Everybody Dance (film)
Film Daily
Flesh and the Devil
Flying High (1931 film)
Fools for Luck
Freaks (1932 film)
George K. Arthur
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Grauman's Chinese Theatre
Greta Garbo
Gus Edwards (vaudeville)
Gwen Lee
Hallelujah (film)
Harrigan's Kid
Harry Rapf
He Who Gets Slapped (film)
His Glorious Night
His Hour
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
In This Corner (1948 film)
Inspiration (1931 film)
International Buster Keaton Society
Irving G. Ries
Irving Thalberg
Irving Thalberg Jr.
It's in the Air (1935 film)
Jack Benny
Joan Crawford
John Arnold (cinematographer)
John Gilbert (actor)
John M. Nickolaus
John Mosher (writer)
Joseph W. Farnham
June Purcell
Just a Gigolo (1931 film)
Karl Dane
La Bohème (1926 film)
Lady Godiva
Laserdisc
Laugh, Clown, Laugh
Laurel and Hardy
Let Us Be Gay
Letty Lynton
Lionel Barrymore
Lionel Barrymore filmography
List of early color feature films
List of early sound feature films (1926–1929)
Lon Chaney
London After Midnight (film)
Lost in a Harem
Love in the Rough
Manhattan Merry-Go-Round (film)
Marie Antoinette (1938 film)
Marie Dressler
Marion Davies
Master of ceremonies
Mata Hari (1931 film)
Max Fabian (cinematographer)
Maytime (1937 film)
Meet the People
Merry-Go-Round (1923 film)
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Mordaunt Hall
Motion Picture Association of America
Murder Goes to College
Musical comedy
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
Nacio Herb Brown
Nils Asther
No More Ladies
Noisy Neighbors
Norma Shearer
Oh! What a Nurse!
Old Black Joe
Old Folks at Home
Oliver Hardy
Politics (1931 film)
Polly Moran
Possessed (1931 film)
Pre-Code Hollywood
Private Lives (film)
Ramon Novarro
Rasputin and the Empress
Red-Headed Woman
Red Dust (1932 film)
Redemption (1930 film)
Reducing (film)
Revue
Riffraff (1936 film)
Riptide (1934 film)
Robert Hopkins (screenwriter)
Romeo and Juliet
Romeo and Juliet (1936 film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Show People
Silent film
Singin' in the Rain
Singin' in the Rain (song)
Smilin' Through (1932 film)
Sophie Lang Goes West
Sound film
Stan Laurel
Steamboat Bill, Jr.
Stepping Out (1931 film)
Strange Interlude (film)
Strike Up the Band (song)
Student Tour
Tarzan the Ape Man (1932 film)
Technicolor
The Barretts of Wimpole Street (1934 film)
The Better 'Ole (1926 film)
The Big House (1930 film)
The Big Parade
The Big Store
The Broadway Melody
The Brox Sisters
The Champ (1931 film)
The Chief (film)
The Cobra Strikes
The Crowd (1928 film)
The Divorcee
The Fortune Hunter (1927 film)
The Good Earth (film)
The Guardsman
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1923 film)
The Kiss (1929 film)
The Last of Mrs. Cheyney (1929 film)
The Love of the Last Tycoon
The Man on the Box (1925 film)
The March of Time (MGM musical)
The March of Time (film)
The Merry Widow (1925 film)
The Merry Widow (1934 film)
The Missing Link (1927 film)
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Road to Mandalay (1926 film)
The Rogue Song
The Secret Six
The Show-Off (1934 film)
The Sin of Madelon Claudet
The Student Prince in Old Heidelberg
The Temptress
The Tower of Lies
The Trap (1922 film)
The Traveling Saleswoman
The Trial of Mary Dugan (1929 film)
The Unholy Three (1925 film)
The Unholy Three (1930 film)
The Winning Ticket
This Time for Keeps (1942 film)
Torrent (1926 film)
Trader Horn (1931 film)
Tugboat Annie
Turner Classic Movies
Twelve Miles Out
Valencia (1926 film)
Variety (magazine)
Voice of the City
Warner Archive Collection
Way for a Sailor
West of Zanzibar (1928 film)
What Every Girl Should Know (film)
What Every Woman Knows (1934 film)
Where East Is East
Whistling in the Dark (1933 film)
White Shadows in the South Seas
William Haines
William S. Gray (film editor)
Winter Carnival (film)
You Can't Buy Everything
You Were Meant for Me (1929 song)
http://www.busterkeaton.com/Films/D01_Hollywood_Revue_of_1929.html
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v119999
https://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1930
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0019993/
https://www.nytimes.com/1929/08/15/archives/the-screen-fun-and-catchy-music.html
https://archive.org/details/realtinsel00rose
https://archive.org/details/realtinsel00rose/page/189
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/hollywood_revue_of_1929
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/211/enwp
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/9787
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q981032#identifiers
https://musicbrainz.org/work/13df51e7-5eae-4e6d-b68c-b9d10d0e0759
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q981032#P345
