The Razor's Edge (1946 film)
The Razor's Edge is a 1946 American drama film based on W. Somerset Maugham's 1944 novel of the same name. It stars Tyrone Power, Gene Tierney, John Payne, Anne Baxter, Clifton Webb, and Herbert Marshall, with a supporting cast including Lucile Watson, Frank Latimore, and Elsa Lanchester. Marshall plays Somerset Maugham. The film was directed by Edmund Goulding.
The Razor's Edge tells the story of Larry Darrell, an American pilot traumatized by his experiences in World War I, who sets off in search of some transcendent meaning in his life. The story begins through the eyes of Larry's friends and acquaintances as they witness his personality change after the war. His rejection of conventional life and search for meaningful experience allows him to thrive while the more materialistic characters suffer reversals of fortune.
The Razor's Edge was nominated for four Academy Awards, including Best Motion Picture, with Anne Baxter winning Best Actress in a Supporting Role.


== Plot ==
In the film Herbert Marshall appears as W. Somerset Maugham as the story's narrator and as an important character who drifts in and out of the lives of the other major players. The opening scene is at a party in the summer of 1919 at a Chicago country club. Elliott Templeton, an expatriate who has been living in France for years, has returned to the United States for the first time since before the war to visit his sister, Louisa Bradley, and his niece, Isabel. Isabel is engaged to be marry Larry Darrell, recently returned from service as a pilot during the Great War. Elliott strongly disapproves of Larry because he has no money and no interest in getting a job with a future so he can support Isabel properly. Among the party guests are Larry's childhood friend Sophie Nelson and her boyfriend, Bob MacDonald.
Larry refuses a job offer from the father of his friend Gray Maturin, a millionaire who is also hopelessly in love with Isabel. He tells her that he wants to "loaf" on his small inheritance of $3,000 a year. Larry has been traumatized by the death of a comrade who sacrificed himself on the last day of the war to save Larry. He is driven to try to find out what meaning life has, if any; he cannot do that in a stockbrokers’ office or a law firm. Larry and Isabel agree to postpone their marriage for a year so that he can go to Paris to try to clear his muddled thoughts.
Elliott has plans for Larry's entrée into elite Parisian society, none of which materialize. In Paris, Larry immerses himself in the life of a student, living in a modest neighborhood, frequenting neighborhood bistros, biking through the countryside, and attending lectures at the Sorbonne. After a year, Isabel and her mother come to Paris and are met by Elliott. Elliott is surprised that Larry is there to meet them as well and Isabel's mother explains to him that Isabel wired Larry about their impending arrival. Larry can see a little more clearly now, and asks Isabel to marry him immediately. She does not understand his desire to learn, and, more significantly, cannot bear the thought of possibly spending all their lives in what she sees as poverty. She breaks their engagement. The night before she returns to Chicago she sets out to seduce Larry, planning to write later and tell him that she is pregnant, thus tricking him into marriage; but she cannot go through with it. When Elliott, who has been waiting up for her, asks why she did not go through with it, she answers that it was her “better nature.” Elliott scoffs and says it was her “Middle-western horse sense” — she will forget him.
At the reception after Isabel's marriage to Gray, which will provide her with the elite social and family life she craves, Sophie and Bob MacDonald are there. They have a baby girl named Linda. Meanwhile, Larry works in a coal mine in France, where a drunk, debauched defrocked priest, Kosti, urges him travel to India to learn from a mystic. Larry studies at a monastery in the Himalayas under the tutelage of a holy man, experiencing a moment of elightenment on a mountaintop. The holy man urges Larry to go back to his people but to not lose his awareness of the infinite beauty of the world and of God. Meanwhile, back in the States, the MacDonalds are in a car crash caused by a drunk driver: Bob and the baby are killed. In the hospital, the doctor asks Gray to tell Sophie, who is distraught and must be heavily sedated.
Back in Paris, Maugham meets Elliott by chance and learns that Isabel and her family are living with Elliott after being financially ruined by the stock market crash of 1929. Gray has had a nervous breakdown and suffers from terrible headaches. Elliott "sold short" before the crash and "made a killing" in the market. Maugham arranges a lunch for Elliott and his household to meet an old friend, who turns out to be Larry. Isabel introduces Larry to her two daughters; the older is seven. It has been a long time since they last met. Larry is able to help Gray with his headaches using an Indian form of hypnotic suggestion.
Gray observes to Maugham that Larry has not aged since Chicago, and Maugham replies that India changed him: He “looks extraordinarily happy.... Calm, yet strangely aloof.” Later, while slumming at a disreputable bar in the Rue de Lappe, they encounter Sophie, now a drunkard and drug user, and her abusive pimp. Isabel is revolted, Gray horrified, and Larry friendly and calm. In the taxi, Larry, who did not know about the tragedy, asks what happened, and they tell him. Isabel says they had to “drop” Sophie eventually because of her bad behavior, and insists there was always something wrong with her, deep inside, or she would not have been so weak. Larry disagrees, recalling Sophie as an innocent young girl, and Isabel is plainly jealous. The Maturins join Elliott at the spa at Vittel for a few weeks. When they return, Isabel phones Larry at his hotel repeatedly. When she finally reaches him, he tells Isabel that he has seen a lot of Sophie and that she has stopped drinking and they are going to be married. The news drives Isabel wild and she summons Maugham; she wants him to intervene. He refuses, reminding her of what Larry did for Gray, but she insists that Sophie is bad through and through and does not want to be helped. Maugham replies that drinking is not necessarily bad. He calls people bad who lie and cheat and are unkind. He tells her that Larry is in the grip of self-sacrifice and suggests that if she does not want to lose him altogether she should be nice to Sophie. So she asks Maugham to invite them all to lunch the next day, at the Ritz.
After lunch, they have coffee in the lobby. Sophie and Larry decline liqueurs, and Elliott bemoans the fact that his doctor forbids alcohol. The waiter convinces Elliott that a little Persovka can do no harm, and Elliott waxes poetic: drinking it is “like listening to music by moonlight.” Isabel samples it, somewhat dramatically, and agrees, asking for some to be sent to the apartment. Maugham watches Sophie's reaction. Isabel wants to give Sophie a wedding dress that she saw in Molyneux's, and laughingly tells Larry he cannot come to the fitting — no husbands allowed. Isabel and Sophie arrange to meet at the apartment the next afternoon.
In the apartment, after the fitting, Isabel and Sophie have had non-alcoholic drinks. At last, they talk honestly — at least Sophie does. She has not had a drink since that night in the Rue de Lappe — clearly Larry went back for her immediately after he left the others. She admits what a struggle it is and says that she realizes that this is her last chance. She knew that Isabel was watching her at the Ritz. Isabel pours herself some Persovka and again praises it. She shows Sophie pictures of her children, which stirs memories of Linda. Then she asks Sophie to wait while she picks up her daughter from the dentist. They can talk more when she comes back. The butler removes the drinks tray; Isabel stares at the bottle of Persovka on the side table and then walks out. After a while, Sophie takes multiple drinks.
Larry scours the bars and dives, following the trail of a woman demanding Persovka, until he tracks Sophie to an opium den. Sophie runs away, screaming, and disappears. Larry is beaten and thrown into the street; his last attempt to save his childhood companion from her depravity and despair has proved fruitless. A year later, Sophie is murdered in Toulon, and her death reunites Larry and Maugham during the police investigation.
Maugham and Larry visit Elliott on his deathbed in Nice. Maugham takes on the delicate task of asking Elliott if he is ready for the last rites. Elliott is in tears because he has not received an invitation for an important masked ball hosted by Princess Edna Novemali, princess-by-marriage, an American from Milwaukee whom Elliott helped when she first entered European society and who now treats him with contempt. Isabel and Gray arrive just as Larry leaves the house on a mission of mercy. Elliott tells Gray that he will now have enough money to pay off his father's debts and rebuild the business.
Larry persuades Miss Keith, the Princess's social secretary, to allow him to take a blank invitation to counterfeit one for Elliott and give him peace of mind. Elliott is hugely gratified when the Bishop himself comes to perform the last rites. Then an urgent message arrives — the invitation. Elliott's last act is to dictate a proper reply. He regrets he cannot attend “owing to a previous engagement with his Blessed Lord,” and adds, “The old witch.”
Immediately after Elliott's death, Isabel learns that Larry is leaving that night. He plans to work his way back to America aboard a tramp steamer. He tells her he may end up buying a taxi. She has already told Maugham that she plans on seeing as much of Larry as possible when she and Gray return to the States. Now she tells Larry that Gray needs him to help with the business, and as moral support. She reveals that Gray was suicidal at one point. Larry reassures her: Gray has got a second chance, as he himself had. He talks to her about his quest, but Isabel can only pour out her love and her regret that she did not marry him and stop him before he began it. She throws her arms around him and tells him she loves him and, she says, she knows he feels the same. She begs him to come home and be with her, then pulls back when he does not respond. Larry calmly says, “Tell me about Sophie,” and under his questioning Isabel first lies but then admits to tempting Sophie deliberately. She is full of self-righteous anger and justification, claiming that she did it to save Larry and as a test of Sophie's strength. Then Larry says, quietly, “That’s pretty much what I thought. Sophie is dead...murdered.” A stunned Isabel asks, “Do they know who did it?” Larry replies, “No, but I do.” The camera remains on Larry, so Isabel's face is not seen, obscuring whether Larry's response registers with her at all. He immediately tells Isabel that there is no need to be shocked about Sophie, that all day he has had the feeling that Sophie is where she wanted to be, with her husband and child. Gently and with compassion in his voice and face, he says “Good-bye Isabel. Take good care of Gray. He needs you now more than ever.” He walks away, his footsteps echoing on the hallway's marble floor.
A reeling Isabel tells Maugham, “I’ve lost him for good. ... Do you suppose we’ll ever see him again?” Maugham replies that her America will be as remote from Larry's as the Gobi Desert. She still does not understand what Larry wants. Maugham tells her that Larry has found what most people want and never get. “I don’t think anyone can fail to be better and nobler, kinder for knowing him. You see my dear, goodness is after all the greatest force in the world, and he’s got it.” Isabel turns to look out the window at the Mediterranean. Larry, on the deck of a storm-tossed ship, hoists cargo in the rain.


== Cast ==


== Production history ==
20th Century Fox purchased the film rights from Maugham in March 1945 for $50,000 plus 20% of the film's net profits. The contract stipulated that Maugham would receive an additional $50,000 if the film did not start shooting by February 2, 1946. In August 1945, producer Darryl F. Zanuck had the second unit begin shooting in the mountains around Denver, Colorado, which were to portray the Himalayas in the film. The stars had not yet been cast; Larry Darrell was played by a stand-in and was filmed in extreme long shot. Zanuck wanted Tyrone Power to star and delayed casting until Power finished his service in the Marines in January 1946.
Zanuck originally hired George Cukor to direct, but creative differences led to Cukor's removal. Although Maugham wanted his friend (whom he had in mind when he created the character) Gene Tierney for Isabel, Zanuck chose Maureen O'Hara but told her not to tell anyone. As O'Hara recounted in her autobiography, she shared the secret with Linda Darnell, but Zanuck found out, fired O'Hara, and hired Tierney. Betty Grable and Judy Garland were originally considered for the role of Sophie before Baxter was cast. Maugham wrote an early draft of the screenplay but not one word of his version was used in the final script, and as a result Maugham declined Zanuck's request to write a sequel, and never worked in Hollywood again.


== Reception ==
New York Times film critic Bosley Crowther panned The Razor's Edge, complaining of its inability to explain the protagonist's spiritual awakening, and of "glib but vacuous dialogue" that hamstrung the actors, shortcomings he blamed on the limitations of the underlying Maugham story, which, said Crowther, was "a vague and uncertain encroachment upon a mystical moral realm, more emotional than intellectual."


== Awards and nominations ==


== See also ==
The Razor's Edge, a 1984 adaptation with Bill Murray, Theresa Russell, Catherine Hicks, Denholm Elliott, and James Keach


== References ==


== External links ==
The Razor's Edge at IMDb
The Razor's Edge at the TCM Movie Database
The Razor's Edge at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Razor's Edge at AllMovie
The Razor's Edge at Rotten Tomatoes'Til We Meet Again
19th Academy Awards
20,000 Years in Sing Sing
20th Century Fox
42nd Street (film)
4th Golden Globe Awards
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Broadway Butterfly
A Message to Garcia (film)
A Yank in the R.A.F.
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Academy Awards
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Across the Pacific (1926 film)
Alexander's Ragtime Band (film)
Alfred Newman (composer)
AllMovie
All About Eve
Always Goodbye (1938 film)
Anne Baxter
Arthur C. Miller
Baby Face (film)
Betty Grable
Bill Murray
Blondie of the Follies
Blood Money (1933 film)
Blood and Sand (1941 film)
Born to Be Bad (1934 film)
Bosley Crowther
Brigham Young (film)
Broadway Rose (film)
Bulldog Drummond Strikes Back (1934 film)
Call of the Wild (1935 film)
Cardinal Richelieu (film)
Catherine Hicks
Cecil Humphreys
Chicago
China Girl (1942 film)
Claudia (1943 film)
Clifton Webb
Country club
Crack in the Mirror
Dante's Inferno (1924 film)
Dark Secrets
Dark Victory
Darryl F. Zanuck
David and Bathsheba (film)
Dean Zanuck
Defrocking
Denholm Elliott
Denver, Colorado
Doctor X (film)
Down Among the Sheltering Palms (film)
Down Argentine Way
Drama (film and television)
Edmund Goulding
Elsa Lanchester
Eugene Borden
Everybody Does It
Ex-Lady
Find Your Man
Folies Bergère de Paris
Footloose Widows
Forever and a Day (1943 film)
Frank Latimore
Fritz Kortner
Fury (1923 film)
Fury at Furnace Creek
G Men
Gene Tierney
Gentleman's Agreement
George Cukor
Gobi Desert
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture
Good Time Charley
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Happy Landing (1938 film)
Hardboiled Rose
Herbert Marshall
Himalayas
Hogan's Alley (film)
Hollywood Cavalcade
Horilka
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Hudson's Bay (film)
Hypnosis
IMDb (identifier)
Illicit (film)
In Old Chicago
International Settlement (film)
Island in the Sun (film)
It Had to Happen
J. Watson Webb Jr.
James Keach
Jazzmania
Jesse James (1939 film)
John Payne (actor)
Judy Garland
Just Around the Corner (1938 film)
Kentucky Moonshine
Lady Killer (1933 film)
Lamar Trotti
Lancer Spy
Last rites
Les Misérables (1935 film)
Life Begins (1932 film)
Linda Darnell
Little Caesar (film)
Little Miss Broadway
Little Old New York (1940 film)
Long shot
Looking for Trouble (1934 film)
Love (1927 American film)
Lucile Watson
Madonna of Avenue A
Mardi Gras (1958 film)
Maureen O'Hara
Maybe It's Love (1930 film)
Mediterranean Sea
Metropolitan (1935 film)
Millionaire
Milwaukee
Mister 880
Moulin Rouge (1934 film)
My Lucky Star (1938 film)
My Man (1928 film)
Nathan Juran
Nervous breakdown
Nice
Nightmare Alley (1947 film)
No Way Out (1950 film)
Noah's Ark (1928 film)
Norman Rockwell
Of Human Bondage (1946 film)
Old San Francisco
Parachute Jumper
Paramount on Parade
Paris (1926 film)
Paul S. Fox
Peacock Alley (1922 film)
People Will Talk
Pigskin Parade
Pinky (film)
Poor Little Rich Girl (1936 film)
Professional Soldier
Reaching for the Moon (1930 film)
Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm (1938 film)
Red Hot Tires (1925 film)
Reed Hadley
Richard D. Zanuck
Richard Day (art director)
Rin Tin Tin
Riptide (1934 film)
Rose of Washington Square
Rotten Tomatoes
Sally, Irene and Mary (1925 film)
Sanctuary (1961 film)
Say It with Songs
Screenplay
Second unit
Selling short
Seventh Heaven (1937 film)
Sex Hygiene
Sing, Baby, Sing
Slave Ship (1937 film)
Son of Fury: The Story of Benjamin Blake
Sorbonne University
Stanislas Bielski
Stanley and Livingstone
State Street Sadie
Stock market crash of 1929
Submarine Patrol
Sun-Up
Swanee River (1939 film)
Tail Spin
Ted Billings
Teenage Rebel
Ten Gentlemen from West Point
Tenderloin (film)
Thanks a Million
That Certain Woman
The Better 'Ole (1926 film)
The Big Gamble (1961 film)
The Bowery (film)
The Bright Shawl
The Cabin in the Cotton
The Caveman (1926 film)
The Chapman Report
The Constant Nymph (1943 film)
The Dark Horse (1932 film)
The Dawn Patrol (1938 film)
The Desired Woman
The Devil's Holiday
The Devil (1921 film)
The Doorway to Hell
The Egyptian (film)
The First Auto
The Flame Within (film)
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great American Broadcast
The Great Lie
The Great Profile
The Jazz Singer
The Life of the Party (1930 film)
The Lighthouse by the Sea
The Little Irish Girl
The Little Princess (1939 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Man I Married
The Man Who Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo (film)
The Man Who Played God (1932 film)
The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit
The Mark of Zorro (1940 film)
The Midnight Taxi
The Mighty Barnum
The New York Times
The Old Maid (1939 film)
The Perfect Lover
The Prisoner of Shark Island
The Public Enemy
The Purple Heart
The Rains Came
The Razor's Edge
The Razor's Edge (1984 film)
The Return of Frank James
The Rich Are Always with Us
The Road to Glory
The Roots of Heaven (film)
The Show of Shows
The Snake Pit
The Snows of Kilimanjaro (1952 film)
The Social Highwayman
The Story of Alexander Graham Bell
The Sun Also Rises (1957 film)
The Trespasser (1929 film)
The View from Pompey's Head
The Visit (1964 film)
The Working Man
Theresa Russell
Thin Ice (1937 film)
This Above All (film)
This Is My Affair
Thomas Little
Three Faces East (1930 film)
Three Weeks in Paris
Three on a Match
Thunder Birds (1942 film)
Tiger Rose (1923 film)
To the Shores of Tripoli
Tobacco Road (film)
Tol'able David
Toulon
Tracked by the Police
Tramp steamer
Turner Classic Movies
Twelve O'Clock High
Tyrone Power
Under Two Flags (1936 film)
United States Marine Corps
Virginia Fox
Vittel
Viva Zapata!
W. Somerset Maugham
Wake Up and Live
We're Not Married!
We Are Not Alone (1939 film)
Wee Willie Winkie (film)
White Banners
Wife, Husband and Friend
Wilson (1944 film)
Winged Victory (film)
Women Love Diamonds
World War I
http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/ampas_awards/DisplayMain.jsp?curTime=1391741090805
https://archive.org/stream/variety169-1948-01#page/n62/mode/1up
http://davidgodman.org/rteach/smaugham.shtml
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v40414
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0038873/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/24925
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/87754/enwp
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q759322#identifiers
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1017237-razors_edge/reviews
https://archive.today/20140207170220/http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/ampas_awards/DisplayMain.jsp?curTime=1391741090805
https://books.google.com/books?id=WIZwZOz8LHsC&dq=aubrey+solomon+20th+century+fox&pg=PA212
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no95023151
https://www.nytimes.com/1946/11/20/archives/the-screen-razors-edge-fox-film-based-on-maugham-novel-opens-at.html
