The Smiling Lieutenant
The Smiling Lieutenant is a 1931 American pre-Code musical comedy film directed by Ernst Lubitsch, starring Maurice Chevalier, Claudette Colbert and Miriam Hopkins, and released by Paramount Pictures.
It was written by Samson Raphaelson and Ernest Vajda from the operetta Ein Walzertraum by Oscar Straus, with libretto by Leopold Jacobson and Felix Dörmann, which in turn was based on the novel Nux, der Prinzgemahl ("Nux the Prince Consort") by Hans Müller-Einigen. The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. This was the first of three films directed by Lubitsch and starring Miriam Hopkins. The other two were Trouble in Paradise and Design for Living.


== Plot ==
In Vienna, Lieutenant Nikolaus "Niki" von Preyn (Maurice Chevalier) meets Franzi (Claudette Colbert), the leader of an all-female-orchestra. They soon fall in love. While standing in formation at a parade honouring the visiting royal family of Flausenthurm, Niki winks at Franzi in the crowd. Unfortunately the gesture is intercepted by Anna, the Princess of Flausenthurm (Miriam Hopkins). The naive princess takes offence; to assuage her, the lieutenant insists that he winked and smiled at her because of her beauty. This backfires; charmed and besotted, Anna demands that she marry the lieutenant, and threatens to marry an American if this plan is thwarted. Franzi leaves Niki upon seeing him return in a royal carriage. After intervention by the Emperor of Austria, an international incident is narrowly averted by the marriage of the lieutenant and the princess, though the marriage is not consummated as Niki will only chastely kiss his bride -- and his father-in-law.
Homesick and lovesick, Niki wanders the streets, and encounters Franzi, who has continued to perform with her orchestra in Flausenthurm since the wedding, unable to move on. The two resume their romance.
Anna finds out and confronts Franzi. During the confrontation, Franzi realizes that the princess is in fact deeply in love with the lieutenant. She decides to save the marriage by giving the dowdy princess a makeover, and they sing the duet "Jazz up your lingerie!" before Franzi departs for good.
The results are a complete success as the lieutenant returns home, follows his satin-clad, cigarette-puffing wife into the bedroom and closes the door – opening it briefly to give the audience a last song and suggestive wink.


== Cast ==
Maurice Chevalier as Lieutenant Nikolaus "Niki" von Preyn
Claudette Colbert as Franzi
Miriam Hopkins as Princess Anna
Charles Ruggles as Max
George Barbier as King Adolf XV
Hugh O'Connell as Niki's Orderly
Granville Bates as Bug Collector (uncredited)
Cornelius MacSunday as Emperor Franz Josef (uncredited)


== Production ==
The film was not made under pleasant circumstances: the shift to the Astoria, New York, studios accounts for the sense of confinement on set. Chevalier described performing – "smiles and cute winks of the eye" – a "mechanical display of technique" due to grief over his mother's death. Lubitsch also played referee between Colbert and Hopkins, who were determined to be shot from the same angle. Lubitsch encouraged their dispute that suited their characters on screen.Scenes from the film were included in the 1931 promotional film by Paramount, The House That Shadows Built.


== Reception ==
The Smiling Lieutenant was Paramount's biggest grosser of 1931. Barrios claims that "Lubitsch and Chevalier were invincible". It was also named the year's "Best Ten" by The New York Times, along with Charlie Chaplin's City Lights and F. W. Murnau's Tabu.Lubitsch was still in the stages of mastering sound-on-film technology and combining it with narrative: James Harvey acclaims that "technically The Smiling Lieutenant is the most accomplished of Lubitsch's early sound films. In sets, camerawork, background music, alternations of sound and silence, thus the film reaches a certain level that makes The Love Parade and Monte Carlo look comparatively stilted". For Andrew Sarris, The Smiling Lieutenant stands between the "lilting lyricism" of Love Parade and the "tempered ironies" in Trouble in Paradise.
Due to an ongoing copyright dispute with the silent-film version, The Smiling Lieutenant remained out of circulation for years and was considered as a lost film until a print was discovered in Denmark in the 1990s. When the film resurfaced, the "general elation" was followed by "an inevitable let down" due to technical problems.


== "The Lubitsch Touch" ==
The notion of "The Lubitsch Touch" is used to describe the visual comment or joke that becomes a trademark or signature of Lubitsch's films. Billy Wilder defines the touch in relation to The Smiling Lieutenant: "It was the elegant use of the Superjoke. You had a joke, and you felt satisfied, and then there was one more big joke on top of it. The joke you didn't expect. That was the Lubitsch touch." The ultimate Superjoke is that at the end of the film, "the wrong girl gets the man".


== References ==


== External links ==

The Smiling Lieutenant at IMDb
The Smiling Lieutenant at AllMovie
The Smiling Lieutenant at the TCM Movie Database
The Smiling Lieutenant at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Smiling Lieutenant at Rotten Tomatoes
Criterion Collection essay by Michael KoreskyAFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Lady's Morals
A Royal Scandal (1945 film)
Academy Award for Best Picture
Adolph Deutsch
AllMovie
Andrew Sarris
Angel (1937 film)
Anna Boleyn
Billy Wilder
Bluebeard's Eighth Wife
Broken Lullaby
Caravan (1934 film)
Carmen (1918 film)
Charles Ruggles
Charlie Chaplin
City Lights
Claudette Colbert
Cluny Brown
Der letzte Walzer
Design for Living (film)
Die Augen der Mumie Ma
Ein Walzertraum
Ernest Vajda
Ernst Lubitsch
Eternal Love (1929 film)
F. W. Murnau
Felix Dörmann
Film score
Forbidden Paradise
Franz Joseph I of Austria
George Barbier (actor)
George Folsey (cinematographer)
Granville Bates
Hans Müller-Einigen
Heaven Can Wait (1943 film)
Hugh O'Connell
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Don't Want to Be a Man
If I Had a Million
Intoxication (film)
Kiss Me Again (1925 film)
Kohlhiesels Töchter (1920 film)
La Ronde (1950 film)
Lady Windermere's Fan (1925 film)
Land Without Music
Leopold Jacobson
Libretto
List of rediscovered films
Lost film
Madame DuBarry (1919 film)
Main Street to Broadway
Maurice Chevalier
Merrill G. White
Meyer from Berlin
Miriam Hopkins
Monte Carlo (1930 film)
Musical comedy
My Wife, the Movie Star
Ninotchka
One Hour with You
Operetta
Oscar Straus (composer)
Paramount Pictures
Paramount on Parade
Pre-Code Hollywood
Romeo and Juliet in the Snow
Rosita (film)
Rotten Tomatoes
Samson Raphaelson
Sarajevo (1940 French film)
Servants' Entrance
Shoe Palace Pinkus
So This Is Paris (1926 film)
Sumurun
Suspicion (1941 film)
Tabu (1931 film)
That Lady in Ermine
That Uncertain Feeling (film)
The Ballet Girl
The Chocolate Soldier
The Doll (1919 film)
The Flame (1923 film)
The Gentleman from Maxim's
The Harvey Girls
The Honeymoon Express
The House That Shadows Built
The Housing Shortage
The Last of Mrs. Cheyney (1937 film)
The Love Parade
The Loves of Pharaoh
The Marriage Circle
The Merry Widow (1934 film)
The New York Times
The Oyster Princess
The Patriot (1928 film)
The Rosentopf Case
The Shop Around the Corner
The Student Prince in Old Heidelberg
The Swabian Maiden
The Toboggan Cavalier
The Wild Cat (1921 film)
Three Women (1924 film)
To Be or Not to Be (1942 film)
Trouble in Paradise (1932 film)
Turner Classic Movies
Vienna
When Four Do the Same
Ziegfeld Follies (film)
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/12/movies/homevideo/12dvds.html
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v110694
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0022074/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/6672
https://www.criterion.com/current/posts/648
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/smiling_lieutenant
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/90571/enwp
