The Life of Emile Zola
The Life of Emile Zola is a 1937 American biographical film about the 19th-century French author Émile Zola starring Paul Muni and directed by William Dieterle.
It premiered at the Los Angeles Carthay Circle Theatre to great critical and financial success. Contemporary reviews ranked it as the greatest biographical film made up to that time.
In 2000, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."Produced during the Great Depression and after the Nazi Party had taken power in Germany, the film failed to explore the key issue of antisemitic injustice in France in the late 19th century, when Zola became involved in the Dreyfus affair and worked to gain the officer's release. Some recent studies have noted the film as an example of Hollywood's timidity at the time: antisemitism was not mentioned in the film, nor was "Jew" said in dialogue. Some explicitly anti-Nazi films were canceled in this period, and other content was modified. This was also the period when Hollywood had established the Production Code, establishing an internal censor, in response to perceived threats of external censorship.
The Life of Emile Zola became the second biographical film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture.


== Plot ==
Set in the mid through late 19th century, the film depicts Émile Zola's early friendship with Post-Impressionist painter Paul Cézanne and his rise to fame through his prolific writing. It also explores his involvement late in the Dreyfus affair.
In 1862 Paris, struggling writer Zola shares a drafty Paris attic with Cézanne. His fiancée Alexandrine procures him a desk clerk job at a bookshop, but he is soon fired after he arouses the ire of his employer and an agent of police with his provocative novel The Confessions of Claude. He then witnesses many injustices in French society, such as a crowded river slum, unlawful mining conditions and corruption in the army and government. Finally, a chance encounter with a street prostitute hiding from a police raid inspires his first bestseller, Nana, an exposé of the steamy underside of Parisian life.
Despite the chief censor's pleading, Zola writes other successful books such as The Downfall, a scathing denunciation of the French commanders' blunders and disunity that led to a disastrous defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. He becomes rich and famous, marries Alexandrine and settles down to a comfortable life in his mansion. One day, his old friend Cézanne, still poor and unknown, visits him before leaving the city. He accuses Zola of having become complacent because of his success and terminates their friendship.
An intercepted letter for the German embassy confirms that there is a spy within the French general staff. With little thought, the army commanders decide that Captain Alfred Dreyfus, a Jew, is the traitor. He is court-martialed, publicly degraded and imprisoned on Devil's Island in French Guiana.
Later, Colonel Picquart, the new chief of intelligence, discovers evidence implicating Major Walsin-Esterhazy, an infantry officer of Hungarian descent, as the actual spy. However, Picquart is ordered by his superiors to remain silent to avert official embarrassment, and is quickly reassigned to a remote post.
Four years have passed since Dreyfus's degradation. His loyal wife Lucie pleads with Zola to take up her husband's cause. Zola is reluctant to surrender his comfortable life, but Lucie brings forth new evidence to pique his curiosity. He publishes an open letter known as "J'accuse" in the newspaper L'Aurore accusing the high command of covering up the monstrous injustice, and it causes a firestorm throughout Paris. Zola barely escapes from an angry mob incited by military agents provocateurs as riots erupt in the city streets.
As expected, Zola is charged with libel. His attorney Maitre Labori does his best against the presiding judge's refusal to allow him to introduce evidence about the Dreyfus affair and the perjury and biased testimony committed by all the military witnesses, except for Picquart. Zola is found guilty and sentenced to a year in prison and a 3,000-franc fine. He reluctantly accepts his friends' advice flee to London in order to continue the campaign on behalf of Dreyfus.
With the demand for justice reaching a worldwide level, a new French administration finally proclaims that Dreyfus is innocent, and those responsible for the coverup are dismissed or commit suicide. Walsin-Esterhazy flees the country in disgrace. After his return to Paris, Zola dies of accidental carbon monoxide poisoning caused by a faulty stove the night before the public ceremony in which Dreyfus is exonerated and inducted into the Legion of Honor. His body is buried in the Panthéon in Paris and he is given the farewell of a hero and warrior.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
In 1936, literary agent Heinz Herald first proposed the story to producer Henry Blanke, and Hal B. Wallis, Warner Bros.' executive producer for biographical pictures, assigned Herald and Geza Herczeg to develop the script. Their first treatment, titled Emile Zola: The Conscience of Humanity, centered around the Dreyfus affair, with Zola's literary career merely a background plot. Herald and Herczeg saw Zola's struggles to be similar to those faced by Louis Pasteur in The Story of Louis Pasteur, and their script ended with Zola triumphantly speaking out as a voice of truth as a parallel for the incipient turmoil taking place in Europe. Their 200-page script draft was submitted in November 1936, which staff writer Norman Reilly Raine was assigned to revise. Blanke supervised the creation of the final script, which included further contributions by Herald, Herczeg and Raine but also those from star Paul Muni, director William Dieterle and Wallis. The final script was ready by February 1937, and an initial budget of $699,000 was allocated to the production of the film.Wallis and Blanke's relationship during production of the film was contentious; while Wallis wished to follow the successful formula established by The Story of Louis Pasteur, Blanke fought for the integrity of the project. The two men clashed over nearly every aspect of production, including the casting of the female lead; Wallis wished to cast Josephine Hutchinson, who had played Pasteur's wife, but Blanke disagreed and a compromise was reached in the casting of Gloria Holden. Blanke was determined to imbue the picture with authenticity and argued that Muni's appearance should differ starkly from that of the Pasteur picture, but Wallis, concerned with Muni's box-office appeal, overruled Blanke and instructed the makeup artist to maintain Muni's recognizable features above all else. Blanke threatened to leave the project following a bitter dispute over the hiring of a costumer, but Wallis relented.Filming began in March 1937 and was scheduled for 42 days. Muni's climactic courtroom speech was filmed in one six-minute take, but Wallis requested that Blanke and Dieterle intersperse the scene with crowd shots. Wallis and Blanke also argued over the quality of actor Ben Welden's performance as Paul Cézanne, and actor Vladimir Sokoloff was brought in to reshoot Welden's scenes. The reshoots caused the production of the film to extend ten days over schedule, and filming was completed on May 10.Wallis and Blanke also fought over the film's title. While Wallis favored The Story of Emile Zola, Blanke suggested alternatives such as The Truth Is on the March, I Accuse and Destiny before The Life of Emile Zola was chosen, though the film does not actually depict much of Zola's life.Muni was paid $50,000 for his performance.


== Reception and interpretation ==
Following a successful preview screening that did not yet include Max Steiner's musical score, The Life of Emile Zola premiered on August 11, 1937 and became an immediate sensation. Soon after, Warner Bros. placed full-page advertisements in several Los Angeles newspapers congratulating the cast and crew.Contemporary reviews were nearly unanimous in their praise. Frank S. Nugent of The New York Times wrote: 

"Rich, dignified, honest, and strong, it is at once the finest historical film ever made and the greatest screen biography, greater even than The Story of Louis Pasteur with which the Warners squared their conscience last year ... Paul Muni's portrayal of Zola is, without doubt, the best thing he has done."
Variety wrote that the film was "a vibrant, tense and emotional story ... It is finely made and merits high rating as cinema art and significant recognition as major showmanship." Harrison's Reports described it as "A dignified, powerful, and at times stirring historical drama, brilliantly directed, and superbly acted by Paul Muni, as Zola, the great French writer."John Mosher of The New Yorker praised the film as "a picture of considerable distinction" with "no nonsense."Writing for Night and Day, Graham Greene offered a neutral review, noting that despite its inaccuracies, "truth to the film mind is the word you see on news-posters." Greene commented that appearances from seemingly significant characters such as Cézanne were largely irrelevant to the plot and that all of the events in the film happen suddenly.The Life of Emile Zola topped Film Daily's year-end poll of 531 critics as the best film of 1937.Certain scenes were interpreted at the time as "indirect attacks on Nazi Germany." As David Denby writes about the movie in 2013, "At the end, in an outpouring of the progressive rhetoric that was typical of the thirties, Zola makes a grandiloquent speech on behalf of justice and truth and against nationalist war frenzy." However, the film is silent about the fact that Dreyfus was Jewish and the victim of French antisemitism.The French government allegedly banned the movie in 1939, possibly because of the sensitivity of the Dreyfus affair.On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 92% from 72 reviews, with an average rating of 7.5/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "Urgently relevant in an era of escalating bigotry and fascism, The Life of Emile Zola is a respectful and staid tribute to the French novelist, enlivened by Paul Muni's chameleonic prowess."


== Academy Award wins and nominations ==
At the 10th Academy Awards, the film received ten nominations (and thereby became the first film in Academy Award history to reach double digits for nominations) and won three awards.


== Controversy ==
In his 2013 book titled The Collaboration: Hollywood's Pact with Hitler, Ben Urwand wrote that Hollywood producers made a pact to avoid antagonizing Adolf Hitler and aided the Nazis by suppressing films that portrayed the Nazis' brutality: "The studios cancelled several explicitly anti-Nazi films planned for production, and deleted from several other movies anything that could be construed as critical of the Nazis, along with anything that might be seen as favorable to the Jews—or even a simple acknowledgment that they existed."Urwand wrote that Jewish studio head Jack L. Warner ordered the word "Jew" to be excised from the script and that Georg Gyssling, the Nazi consul to the United States in Los Angeles, was occasionally allowed to review and provide recommendations on films before they were released, with changes sometimes made based on his comments. However, Urwand's thesis that Warner was collaborating with the Nazis has been strongly disputed by Warner's family members, especially Alicia Meyer.In his study Hollywood and Hitler, 1933–1939, Thomas Doherty also analyzed the topic. David Denby, who wrote a long overview article about the issue in The New Yorker, points out that while Doherty supports some of Urwand's thesis, Doherty provides more context for the studios' behavior, setting it against the political culture of the period. The studios were under social pressure during the Great Depression to produce films that helped the United States weather the crisis. There were fears of political radicalism in the U.S. while European movements, from the Nazis to communism in the Soviet Union, were considered threats. Denby believes that the predominantly Jewish studio heads were timid and overly cautious, appearing to be fearful of their place in American society.


== References ==


== External links ==

The Life of Emile Zola at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Life of Emile Zola at IMDb
The Life of Emile Zola at AllMovie
The Life of Emile Zola at the TCM Movie Database
The Life of Emile Zola at Rotten Tomatoes
The Life of Emile Zola essay by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, Bloomsbury Academic, 2010 ISBN 0826429777, pages 261–262 [1]10th Academy Awards
12 Years a Slave (film)
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Beautiful Mind (film)
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Dispatch from Reuters
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Midsummer Night's Dream (1935 film)
A Passage to India (film)
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
A Studio at Les Batignolles
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Adorable (film)
Agent provocateur
Alfred Dreyfus
AllMovie
All About Eve
All Quiet on the Western Front (1930 film)
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Amadeus (film)
Amarcord
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Hustle
An American in Paris (film)
Anatole France
Annie Hall
Another Dawn (1937 film)
Antisemitism
Anton Grot
Argo (2012 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Au Bonheur des Dames
Auguste Mercier
Behind the Altar
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Ben Urwand
Ben Welden
Birdman (film)
Blockade (1938 film)
Boots Malone
Boyhood (2014 film)
Braveheart
Broadcast News (film)
Brokeback Mountain
CODA (2021 film)
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Carnival Confession
Carol (film)
Carthay Circle Theater
Carthay Circle Theatre
Casablanca (film)
Cavalcade (1933 film)
Chariots of Fire
Charles Richman (actor)
Chicago (2002 film)
Cimarron (1931 film)
Citizen Kane
Crash (2004 film)
Cries and Whispers
Cruel Train
Cézanne and I
Dances with Wolves
Dark City (1950 film)
Darling (1965 film)
David Denby
Day for Night (film)
Demon of the Sea
Devil's Island
Dickie Moore (actor)
Donald Crisp
Dr. Ehrlich's Magic Bullet
Dr. Monica
Dr. Socrates
Dreyfus affair
Drive My Car (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
Dubrowsky
Duel in the Sun (film)
Elephant Walk
Erin O'Brien-Moore
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Fandango Media
Far from Heaven
Fargo (1996 film)
Fashions of 1934
Female (1933 film)
Ferdinand Walsin Esterhazy
Fernand Labori
Film Daily
First Cow
Five Easy Pieces
Florence Roberts
Fog Over Frisco
Forrest Gump
Franco-Prussian War
Frank Nugent
Frank S. Nugent
Frank Sheridan (actor)
François Zola
French franc
From Headquarters (1933 film)
From Here to Eternity
Gale Sondergaard
Gandhi (film)
Gentleman's Agreement
Georg Gyssling
Georges Clemenceau
Georges Picquart
Germinal (1913 film)
Germinal (1963 film)
Germinal (1993 film)
Germinal (novel)
Gervaise (film)
Geza Herczeg
Gigi (1958 film)
Gilbert Emery
Gladiator (2000 film)
Gloria Holden
Going My Way
Gone with the Wind (film)
Goodfellas
Graham Greene
Grand Hotel (1932 film)
Grand Slam (1933 film)
Grant Mitchell (actor)
Great Depression
Green Book (film)
Hal B. Wallis
Hamlet (1948 film)
Hannah and Her Sisters
Harrison's Reports
Harry Davenport (actor)
Heinz Herald
Henry Blanke
Henry O'Neill
Her Majesty, Love
High Noon
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Hubert-Joseph Henry
Human Desire
I'll Be Seeing You (1944 film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
In Secret (film)
In Which We Serve
In the Heat of the Night (film)
It Happened One Night
J'Accuse…!
J'accuse (letter)
Jack L. Warner
Jacques Marie Eugène Godefroy Cavaignac
Jean Sandherr
Jewel Robbery
John Litel
John Mosher (writer)
John Russell Taylor
Joseph Schildkraut
Josephine Hutchinson
Juarez (film)
Kismet (1931 film)
Kismet (1944 film)
Kramer vs. Kramer
L'Argent
L'Argent (1928 film)
L'Assommoir
L'Assommoir (film)
L'Enfant roi
L'Inondation
L'Ouragan (opera)
L'attaque du moulin
L'Œuvre
L.A. Confidential (film)
La Bestia humana
La Bête Humaine (film)
La Bête humaine
La Conquête de Plassans
La Curée
La Débâcle
La Faute de l'Abbé Mouret
La Fortune des Rougon
La La Land
La Terre
La joie de vivre
Lady Bird (film)
Lawrence of Arabia (film)
Lawyer Man
Lazare (Bruneau)
Le Docteur Pascal
Le Rêve (novel)
Le Rêve (opera)
Le Ventre de Paris
Leaving Las Vegas
Legion of Honour
Leo F. Forbstein
Les Mystères de Marseille
Les Quatre journées
Les Rougon-Macquart
Libel
Library of Congress
Louis Calhern
Louis Pasteur
Love Letters (1945 film)
Lovers of Paris
Lucie Dreyfus
Ludwig II, King of Bavaria
Lumsden Hare
Madame Du Barry (1934 film)
Maddalena Ferat
Madeleine Férat
Magic Fire
Man Wanted (1932 film)
Man by the Wayside
Marcia Mae Jones
Marty (film)
Matthew Josephson
Max Steiner
Messidor (opera)
Midnight Cowboy
Milk (2008 American film)
Million Dollar Baby
Mistress of the World
Montagu Love
Moonlight (2016 film)
Morris Carnovsky
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mrs. Miniver
Mulholland Drive (film)
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935 film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Left Foot
Nana, the True Key of Pleasure
Nana (1926 film)
Nana (1934 film)
Nana (1944 film)
Nana (1955 film)
Nana (1985 film)
Nana (novel)
Nashville (film)
Nathan Levinson
National Film Registry
Naturalism (literature)
Nazi Party
Naïs Micoulin
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
Night and Day (magazine)
No Country for Old Men
Nomadland
Norman Reilly Raine
Oliver! (film)
Omar Khayyam (film)
On the Waterfront
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (film)
One Hour of Happiness
Ordinary People
Out of Africa (film)
Paid in Full (1950 film)
Panthéon
Parasite (2019 film)
Patton (film)
Paul Cézanne
Paul Muni
Peking Express (film)
Platoon (film)
Portrait of Emile Zola
Portrait of Jennie
Post-Impressionism
Pot-Bouille
Premiere
Prizzi's Honor
Production Code
Quick, Let's Get Married
Quiz Show (film)
Rain Man
Ralph Morgan
Rebecca (1940 film)
Red Mountain (film)
Reds (film)
Robert Barrat
Robert Warwick
Rocky
Roma (2018 film)
Rope of Sand
Rotten Tomatoes
Russ Saunders
Rustle of Spring (film)
Salome (1953 film)
Satan Met a Lady
Saving Private Ryan
Scarlet Dawn
Schindler's List
September Affair
Sex in Chains
Shakespeare in Love
Shop Girls of Paris
Sideways
Silence in the Forest (1929 film)
Six Hours to Live
Slumdog Millionaire
Son Excellence Eugène Rougon
Sons and Lovers (film)
Spotlight (film)
Syncopation (1942 film)
Tennessee Johnson
Terms of Endearment
The Accidental Tourist (film)
The Accused (1949 film)
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Brandenburg Arch
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Broadway Melody
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Crash (1932 film)
The Dance Goes On (1930 film)
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Demise of Father Mouret
The Departed
The Devil's in Love
The Devil and Daniel Webster (film)
The Earth (1921 film)
The English Patient (film)
The Firebird (1934 film)
The French Connection (film)
The Game Is Over
The Godfather
The Godfather Part II
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great O'Malley
The Great Ziegfeld
The Greatest Show on Earth (film)
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1939 film)
The Hurt Locker
The Informer (1935 film)
The Irishman
The King's Speech
The Last Emperor
The Last Flight (1931 film)
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Mask Falls
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Paradise (TV series)
The Player (1992 film)
The Prince and the Pauper (1937 film)
The Sacred Flame (1931 film)
The Saint and Her Fool
The Searching Wind
The Secret Bride
The Shape of Water
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Social Network
The Sound of Music (film)
The Sting
The Story of Louis Pasteur
The Struggle (1931 film)
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Turning Point (1952 film)
The White Angel (1936 film)
Thirst (2009 film)
This Love of Ours
Thou Shalt Not (musical)
Thérèse Raquin
Thérèse Raquin (1928 film)
Thérèse Raquin (1953 film)
Thérèse Raquin (opera)
Titanic (1997 film)
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tony Gaudio
Topsy-Turvy
Traffic (2000 film)
Triumph of Love (1929 film)
Turner Classic Movies
Tár
Une page d'amour
Unforgiven
United 93 (film)
Variety (magazine)
Vladimir Sokoloff
Volcano (1950 film)
Walter Kingsford
Warner Bros.
Warner Bros. Pictures
Warren Low
Watch on the Rhine
West Side Story (1961 film)
William Dieterle
Wings (1927 film)
Wuthering Heights (1939 film)
You Can't Take It with You (film)
Z (1969 film)
Zero Dark Thirty
Émile Zola
http://hollywoodessays.com/2013/08/21/a-rebuttal-to-ben-urwand-and-the-collaboration
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1938
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=EE05E7DF173FE46FBC4A52DFBE66838C629EDE
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v29244
https://variety.com/1937/film/reviews/the-life-of-emile-zola-1200411475/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0029146/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/3869
https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/26/books/scholar-asserts-that-hollywood-avidly-aided-nazis.html
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1986-10-30-mn-8521-story.html
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/life_of_emile_zola
https://www.loc.gov/item/prn-00-200/librarian-of-congress-names-25-more-films-to-national-film-registry/2000-12-27/
https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/81353/enwp
https://books.google.com/books?id=deq3xI8OmCkC
