The Long Voyage Home
The Long Voyage Home is a 1940 American drama film directed by John Ford. It stars John Wayne, Thomas Mitchell and Ian Hunter. It features Barry Fitzgerald, Wilfrid Lawson, John Qualen, Mildred Natwick, and Ward Bond, among others.
The film was adapted by Dudley Nichols from the plays The Moon of the Caribbees, In the Zone, Bound East for Cardiff, and The Long Voyage Home by Eugene O'Neill. The original plays by Eugene O'Neill were written around the time of World War I and were among his earlier plays. Ford set the story for the motion picture, however, during the early days of World War II.While not one of Ford's best-known works, The Long Voyage Home continues to be well received. Film critics and scholars have noted Gregg Toland's distinctive cinematography, which serves as a precursor of the film noir aesthetic and hinted at his work for Orson Welles' film Citizen Kane (1941).


== Plot ==
A British tramp steamer named the SS Glencairn is on the long voyage home from the West Indies to Baltimore, and then to England during World War II. The crew is a motley, fun-loving, hard-drinking lot. Among them is their consensus leader, a middle-aged Irishman named Driscoll; a young Swedish ex-farmer, Ole Olsen; a spiteful steward nicknamed Cocky; a brooding Lord Jim-like Englishman, Smitty; and a burly, thoroughly dependable bruiser, Davis. On a sultry night in a port in the West Indies, the crew has been confined to the ship by order of the captain, but Drisk has arranged to import a boatload of local ladies. The crew carouse until a drunken brawl breaks out and the ladies are ordered off the ship and denied any of their promised compensation. The next day the ship sails to pick up its cargo for its return trip to England. When the crew discovers that the cargo is high explosives, they rebel, but are easily cowed into submission by the captain and the ship sails.
They are also concerned that Smitty might be a German spy because he is so aloof and secretive. After they assault Smitty and restrain and gag him, they force him to give up the key to a small metal box they have found in his bunk. Opening the box against Smitty's vigorous protests, they discover a packet of letters from Smitty's wife revealing the fact that Smitty has been an alcoholic, dishonorably discharged from the British navy. In the war zone as they near port, a German plane attacks the ship, killing Smitty in a burst of machine gun fire. Reaching England without further incident, the rest of the crew members decide not to sign on for another voyage on the Glencairn and go ashore, determined to help Ole return to his family in Sweden, whom he has not seen in ten years.
In spite of their determination to help Ole, the crew is incapable of passing up the opportunity for a good time drinking and dancing in a seedy bar to which they have been lured by an agent for ships looking for crew members. He has his eye on Ole because he is the biggest and strongest of the lot. He drugs Ole's drink, and his confederates shanghai him aboard another ship, the Amindra. Driscoll and the rest of the drunk crew rescue Ole, but Driscoll is clubbed and left on board as the crew makes its escape. The next morning, the crew straggles back to the Glencairn to sign on for another voyage. A newspaper headline reveals that the Amindra has been sunk in the Channel by German torpedoes, killing all on board.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Independent film producer Walter Wanger made film-making history during the production of this film. He hired nine prominent American artists, all painters, to document the dramatic scenes during the film's production. Mr. Wanger offered a commission of over $50,000 to encourage the artists to participate, these funds were secured with the help of Reeves Lowenthal, the director of the Associated American Artists. No other undertaking of this magnitude and purpose had been done before in Hollywood film making. The artists insisted on three things to ensure a quality effort: freedom of choice on subject matter, studios on the production lot, and a projection room for viewing rushes. The artists who participated were Thomas Benton, Grant Wood, George Biddle, James Chapin, Ernest Fiene, Robert Philipp, Luis Quintanilla, Raphael Soyer and Georges Schreiber. Eleven original paintings emerged from this inaugural effort. These toured the country in the museum circuit of the day beginning with a display in the Associated American Artists Galleries on Fifth Avenue in New York City.As Orson Welles did the following year in Citizen Kane, director John Ford shared his title card with cinematographer Gregg Toland in the opening credits for The Long Voyage Home.


== Release ==
The film did poorly in its theatrical release, losing $224,336. Some critics suggested that the film failed to appeal to the general public because it was too dark and lacked a romance.It was released on DVD in 2006 by Warner Bros. Home Video but is now out-of-print. The Criterion Collection has the home video rights to release it. It has not yet been released on DVD or Blu-ray by The Criterion Collection, but is available for streaming on Criterion Channel as of June 2020.
It is available as part of a John Ford box set, Region 2.


== Reception ==
Film critic Bosley Crowther of The New York Times liked the screenplay, the message of the film, and John Ford's direction. He wrote "John Ford has truly fashioned a modern Odyssey—a stark and tough-fibered motion picture which tells with lean economy the never-ending story of man's wanderings over the waters of the world in search of peace for his soul...it is harsh and relentless and only briefly compassionate in its revelation of man's pathetic shortcomings. But it is one of the most honest pictures ever placed upon the screen; it gives a penetrating glimpse into the hearts of little men and, because it shows that out of human weakness there proceeds some nobility, it is far more gratifying than the fanciest hero-worshiping fare."The staff at Variety magazine wrote "Combining dramatic content of four Eugene O'Neill one-act plays, John Ford pilots adventures of a tramp steamer from the West Indies to an American port, and then across the Atlantic with [a] cargo of high explosives. Picture is typically Fordian, his direction accentuating characterizations and adventures of the voyage." Harrison's Reports called it "A powerful picture, directed with skill and acted with artistry." Film Daily called it "a powerful, realistic vehicle, human and dramatic from main title to finis." John Mosher of The New Yorker wrote a rave review, calling it "one of the magnificent films of film history. Never has the sea, its infinite pictorial possibilities, been so comprehended upon the screen and its beauty and its threat so eloquently conveyed."O'Neill told Ford the film was a "grand, deeply moving and beautiful piece of work...a great picture."Rotten Tomatoes reports 100% approval from critics, based on nine reviews.The title track of folk musician Phil Ochs's album Pleasures of the Harbour was directly inspired by a viewing of the film.


=== Awards and nominations ===


== References ==


== External links ==
The Long Voyage Home at IMDb
The Long Voyage Home at AllMovie
The Long Voyage Home at the TCM Movie Database
The Long Voyage Home at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Long Voyage Home at Rotten Tomatoes
The Long Voyage Home essay by Chris Fujiwara at FIPRESCI
Still Photos from The Long Voyage Home by Ned Scott13th Academy Awards
1940 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
3 Bad Men
3 Godfathers (1948 film)
52nd Street (film)
7 Women
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Devil with Women
A Fight for Love
A Gun Fightin' Gentleman
A Marked Man
A Moon for the Misbegotten
A Touch of the Poet
A Woman's Fool
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Ace of the Saddle
Action (1921 film)
Agnes Boulton
Ah, Wilderness!
Ah, Wilderness! (film)
Air Force (film)
Air Mail (film)
Aladdin and His Lamp
Algiers (film)
AllMovie
All God's Chillun Got Wings (play)
And Then There Were None (1945 film)
Anna Christie
Anna Christie (1923 film)
Anna Christie (1930 English-language film)
Anna Christie (1930 German-language film)
Another Language
Applause (1929 film)
Arabian Nights (1942 film)
Argosy Pictures
Arrowsmith (film)
Arthur Shields
Associated American Artists
Bare Fists
Barry Fitzgerald
Bataan (film)
Battle Zone (film)
Beyond the Horizon (play)
Big Brown Eyes
Billy Bevan
Blockade (1938 film)
Bob E. Perry
Born Reckless (1930 film)
Bosley Crowther
Bringing Up Baby
Bucking Broadway
By Indian Post
Cameo Kirby (1923 film)
Canyon Passage
Carefree (film)
Carlotta Monterey
Chesty: A Tribute to a Legend
Cheyenne's Pal
Cheyenne Autumn
Citizen Kane
Cleopatra (1963 film)
Criterion Channel
Cyril McLaglen
December 7th (film)
Desire Under the Elms
Desperate Trails (1921 film)
Diff'rent
Directed by John Ford
Doctor Bull
Donovan's Reef
Douglas Walton (actor)
Drums Along the Mohawk
Dudley Nichols
Dynamo (play)
Eagle Squadron (film)
Ella O'Neill
Ernest Fiene
Escape from Zahrain
Eternally Yours (film)
Eugene O'Neill
Eugene O'Neill Award
Eugene O'Neill Jr.
Eugene O'Neill National Historic Site
Every Night at Eight
FIPRESCI
Fatal Lady
Film Daily
Film noir
Five Came Back (TV series)
Flashing Spikes
Flesh (1932 film)
For Whom the Bell Tolls (film)
Foreign Correspondent (film)
Fort Apache (film)
Fort Vengeance
Four Men and a Prayer
Four Sons
Gabriel Over the White House
George Biddle
Gideon's Day (film)
Going Hollywood
Government Girl
Grant Wood
Gregg Toland
Gun Law (1919 film)
Gung Ho!
Hangman's House
Harrison's Reports
Harry Tenbrook
Hearts of Oak (film)
Hell Bent (film)
Heller in Pink Tights
Her Master's Voice
History Is Made at Night (1937 film)
Hitchin' Posts
Hoodman Blind
How Green Was My Valley (film)
How the West Was Won (film)
Hughie
Hush Money (1931 film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Met My Love Again
I Want to Live!
Ian Hunter (actor)
In the Zone (play)
Invasion of the Body Snatchers
It Happened Tomorrow
J.M. Kerrigan
Jack Pennick
Jackie (1921 film)
James O'Neill (actor, born 1847)
James Ormsbee Chapin
Joan of Arc (1948 film)
John Ford
John Ford filmography
John Mosher (writer)
John Qualen
John Wayne
Joseph Sawyer
Judge Priest
Just Pals
Kansas Pacific (film)
Kentucky Pride
Korea: Battleground for Liberty
Ladies Courageous
Lady in the Iron Mask
Lazarus Laughed
Lightnin' (1925 film)
List of films with a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes
Little Miss Smiles
Long Day's Journey into Night
Long Day's Journey into Night (1962 film)
Long Day's Journey into Night (1973 film)
Long Day's Journey into Night (1996 film)
Lord Jim
Luis Quintanilla
Man Hunt (1941 film)
Marked Men (1919 film)
Mary Burns, Fugitive
Mary of Scotland (film)
Men Without Women (film)
Mildred Natwick
Mister Roberts (1955 film)
Mogambo
Monte Cristo Cottage
More Stately Mansions
Mother Machree
Mourning Becomes Electra
Mourning Becomes Electra (film)
Mourning Becomes Electra (opera)
Mubi (streaming service)
My Darling Clementine
National Board of Review
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Awards 1940
Navy Wife (1956 film)
Ned Scott
New Girl in Town
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Director
Night in Paradise (1946 film)
North of Hudson Bay
Odyssey
Oona O'Neill
Orson Welles
Palm Springs (1936 film)
Phil Ochs
Pilgrimage (1933 film)
Pinky (film)
Pleasures of the Harbor
Prince Valiant (1954 film)
Private Worlds
Queen Christina (film)
R. T. Layton
Rafaela Ottiano
Raphael Soyer
Ray Binger
Reds (film)
Reign of Terror (film)
Return of the Texan
Richard Hageman
Rider of the Law
Riders of Vengeance
Riley the Cop
Rio Grande (1950 film)
Riot in Cell Block 11
Roadhouse Nights
Robbers' Roost (1932 film)
Robert Philipp
Rookie of the Year (Screen Directors Playhouse)
Roped
Rotten Tomatoes
Run for the Sun
Rustlers (1919 film)
Salome, Where She Danced
Salute (1929 film)
Scarlet Street
Seas Beneath
Secret Beyond the Door
Sergeant Rutledge
Sex Hygiene
Shanghai (1935 film)
Shanghaiing
She Wanted a Millionaire
She Wore a Yellow Ribbon
Sherman Todd
Silver Wings (film)
Sister Kenny
Slightly Honorable
Smart Girl (film)
Smash-Up, the Story of a Woman
Spendthrift (film)
Stagecoach (1939 film)
Stand-In
Steamboat Round the Bend
Straight Shooting
Strange Interlude
Strange Interlude (film)
Strong Boy
Submarine Patrol
Summer Holiday (1948 film)
Sundown (1941 film)
Sure Fire
Swamp Water
Take Me Along
Tap Roots
Tarnished Lady
Thank You (1925 film)
The Adventures of Hajji Baba
The Adventures of Marco Polo
The Arizonian
The Battle of Midway (film)
The Bells of St. Mary's
The Big Punch
The Big Sky (film)
The Bitter Tea of General Yen
The Black Camel (film)
The Black Watch (film)
The Blue Eagle
The Brat
The Case Against Mrs. Ames
The Cocoanuts
The Colter Craven Story
The Craving (1918 film)
The Criterion Collection
The Crusades (1935 film)
The Emperor Jones
The Emperor Jones (1933 film)
The Emperor Jones (1955 film)
The Emperor Jones (1960 TV play)
The Emperor Jones (opera)
The Face of a Genius
The Face on the Bar-Room Floor (1923 film)
The Fighting Brothers
The Fighting Heart (1925 film)
The Freeze-Out
The Fugitive (1947 film)
The Girl in Number 29
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great God Brown
The Gun Packer
The Hairy Ape
The Hangman (1959 film)
The Horse Soldiers
The House Across the Bay
The Hurricane (1937 film)
The Iceman Cometh
The Iceman Cometh (1973 film)
The Iceman Cometh (The Play of the Week)
The Informer (1935 film)
The Iron Horse (film)
The Lady Lies (film)
The Last Hurrah (1958 film)
The Last Outlaw (1919 film)
The Long Gray Line
The Long Voyage Home (album)
The Lost Moment
The Lost Patrol (1934 film)
The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance
The Moon's Our Home
The New Yorker
The Outcasts of Poker Flat (1919 film)
The Phantom Riders
The Plough and the Stars (film)
The President Vanishes (film)
The Prince of Avenue A
The Prisoner of Shark Island
The Quiet Man
The Reckless Moment
The Rising of the Moon (film)
The Scarlet Drop
The Scrapper
The Searchers
The Secret Man
The Shamrock Handicap
The Sheik (film)
The Soul Herder
The Sun Shines Bright
The Three Musketeers (1935 film)
The Tin Star
The Toast of New York
The Tornado (1917 film)
The Trail of Hate (1917 film)
The Trail of the Lonesome Pine (1936 film)
The Village Blacksmith (1922 film)
The Wallop
The Whole Town's Talking
The Wings of Eagles
The World Moves On
They Were Expendable
Thieves' Gold
This Is Korea
This Land Is Mine (film)
Thomas Hart Benton (painter)
Thomas Mitchell (actor)
Thomas T. Moulton
Three Jumps Ahead
Three Mounted Men
Tobacco Road (film)
Torpedo Squadron
Trade Winds (film)
Tramp steamer
Tulsa (film)
Turner Classic Movies
Two Rode Together
Undercover (OSS training film)
United Artists
Up the River
Upstream (film)
Vietnam! Vietnam!
Wagon Master
Walter Wanger
Walter Wanger's Vogues of 1938
Ward Bond
Washington Merry-Go-Round (film)
We've Never Been Licked
Wee Willie Winkie (film)
What Price Glory (1952 film)
When Willie Comes Marching Home
Wild Women (1918 film)
Wilfrid Lawson (actor)
Winter Carnival (film)
World War II
You Can't Buy Everything
You Only Live Once (1937 film)
Young Cassidy
Young Mr. Lincoln
http://www.cinematographers.nl/GreatDoPh/toland.htm
http://www.thenedscottarchive.com/hollywood/films/the-long-voyage-home.html
http://movies2.nytimes.com/mem/movies/review.html?_r=1&title1=Long%20Voyage%20Home,%20The&title2=&reviewer=BOSLEY%20CROWTHER&pdate=19401009&v_id=29946&oref=slogin
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1941
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v29946
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0032728/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100611155058/http://www.fipresci.org/undercurrent/issue_0509/long_voyage.htm
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/5128
https://www.thenedscottarchive.com/hollywood/films/the-long-voyage-home.html
https://www.variety.com/review/VE1117792704.html?categoryid=31&cs=1&p=0
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/long_voyage_home/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_long_voyage_home
https://web.archive.org/web/20110706093728/http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/13th-winners.html
https://nationalboardofreview.org/award-years/1940/
https://mubi.com/awards-and-festivals/nyfccas?year=1940
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/81770/enwp
