The Ox-Bow Incident
The Ox-Bow Incident is a 1943 American Western film directed by William A. Wellman, starring Henry Fonda, Dana Andrews and Mary Beth Hughes, with Anthony Quinn, William Eythe, Harry Morgan and Jane Darwell. Two cowboys arrive in a Western town, when news arrives that a local rancher has been murdered and his cattle stolen. The townspeople, joined by the two cowboys and cowboys from other ranches, form a posse to catch the perpetrators. They find three men in possession of the cattle, and are determined to see justice done on the spot.
The film premiered in May 1943 to positive reviews from critics. It was nominated for the Oscar for Best Picture at the 16th Academy Awards, losing to Casablanca. One of a select group of films to secure just one Oscar nomination, albeit in the Best Picture category. As of 2023, it is the last film to be nominated solely in that category.  The Ox-Bow Incident and The Outlaw (also produced in 1943) are the earliest films in the AllMovie list of psychological Westerns.In 1998, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". The film was adapted from the 1940 novel of the same name, written by Nevadan Walter Van Tilburg Clark.


== Plot ==
In Bridger's Wells, Nevada in 1885, two cowboys, Art Croft and Gil Carter, hitch up their horses and enter Darby's Saloon. There, it is learned that a rancher, Larry Kinkaid, has been murdered. The townspeople immediately form a large posse to pursue the murderers. Art and Gil join. Davies, fearing a lynching, also joins, hoping he can prevent such an occurrence. Major Tetley, dressed in an old Civil War uniform, assumes leadership. His son, Gerald, comes with him. Soon, news arrives that three men with cattle bearing Kinkaid's brand have just entered Bridger's Pass.
Later that night in Ox-Bow Canyon, the posse find three men sleeping, with what are presumed to be stolen cattle nearby. The posse interrogate them: a young, well-spoken man, Donald Martin; a Mexican, Juan Martínez; and an old man, Alva Hardwicke, who is clearly mentally disabled. Martin claims that he purchased the cattle from Kinkaid but received no bill of sale. No one believes Martin, and the posse decide to hang the three men at sunrise. As a final request, Martin writes a letter to his wife and asks Davies to deliver it. When dissent develops among some members of the group, a vote is taken on whether to hang the trio or take them to town to stand trial. Only seven vote for the latter. The rest support a hanging. 
After the lynching, the posse returns to Bridger's Wells. On the way, they encounter the town's sheriff, Risley, who reveals Kinkaid is not dead and that the men who shot him have been arrested. Risley then asks Davies who is responsible for the lynching. “All but seven,” Davies replies, and the sheriff angrily declares, “God better have mercy on you. You won't get any from me.” Later, the posse gather in Darby's Saloon. In silence, they listen as Gil quietly reads Martin's letter aloud to Art. Meanwhile, Major Tetley returns to his house, locks his son out, and commits suicide. In the end, Gil and Art head out of town to deliver the letter and $500 raised by those in the posse for Martin's wife.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Director William A. Wellman loved the novel and wanted to adapt it into a film and then interested Darryl F. Zanuck in producing it. Zanuck agreed in producing the story, on the condition that Wellman would also direct two other films for the studio, Thunder Birds (1942) and Buffalo Bill (1944).
There are several differences between the film and the novel, notably the fate of the Tetleys and the fate of the lynch mob. In the book, young Gerald commits suicide by hanging himself in the barn. This leads his father to fall on his cavalry sword. The sheriff stares down each member of the mob, but then he says he will forget everything.The role of Gil Carter, played by Henry Fonda, was originally offered to Gary Cooper, who turned it down. Fonda was generally unhappy with the quality of the films he was cast in while under contract with 20th Century Fox. This was one of only two films from that period that he was enthusiastic about acting in (the other was The Grapes of Wrath, made in 1940). Fonda regarded this film as one of his favorites.
Filming was done from late June to early August 1942, mostly in studio back-lots and sound stages; a limited amount of location shooting was done at a ranch in Chatsworth and in Lone Pine, both in California. Additional sequences and retakes were done mid-August to late August. 
The production on the film would be shut down for a week or ten days "due to the $5,000-per-film limit on new construction materials" (imposed by the War Production Board). During the shutdown, already used sets were torn down so their materials could be used to build the mountain pass set. Studio publicity noted that the Ox-Bow Valley setting was "the largest set ever constructed" by Fox, covering 26,703 sq ft (2,480.8 m2; 0.6130 acres).The western street set seen in this film was subsequently used in another western, The Gunfighter (1950), which starred Gregory Peck.
After the film was completed, it was kept on the shelf for months because Fox executives were uncertain how to market a film with such a sobering theme.


== Reception ==
The film received mostly positive reviews. Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote that it "is not a picture which will brighten or cheer your day. But it is one which, for sheer, stark drama, is currently hard to beat." Variety called it a "powerful preachment against mob lynching ... Director William Wellman has skillfully guided the characters and driven home the point that hanging is unwarranted. Fonda measures up to star rating ... He helps hold together the loose ends of the rather patent plot." David Lardner of The New Yorker called it a "rather good piece of work". Harrison's Reports printed a negative review, calling it a "depressing, unpleasant, at times horrible, melodrama ... Whoever is responsible for selecting such sordid material for the screen should be awarded a 'booby' prize."More recently, La Furia Umana's Toshi Fujiwara said the film is "one of the most important westerns in the history of American cinema".Clint Eastwood has stated this is his favorite film.
However, Darryl F. Zanuck, head of Twentieth Century-Fox 1935–1956, recalled the film as "a flop. In spite of its significance and its dramatic value, our records showed that it had failed to pay its way.  In fact, its pulling power was less than that of a Laurel and Hardy comedy we made about the same time."
It earned $750,000 in the United States.


== Awards and honors ==
The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture at the 16th Academy Awards, losing to Casablanca. As of 2022, it is the last film to be nominated for Best Picture and nothing else.
An outdoor mural at Twentieth Century Fox Studios, Century City, depicts the filming of The Ox-Bow Incident.


== See also ==
Trial movies


== References ==
Notes


== External links ==
The Ox-Bow Incident at IMDb 
The Ox-Bow Incident at AllMovie 
The Ox-Bow Incident at the TCM Movie Database 
The Ox-Bow Incident at the American Film Institute Catalog 
The Ox-Bow Incident at Rotten Tomatoes 
The Ox-Bow Incident at Box Office Mojo 
Pictures from the movie + trailer
The Ox-Bow Incident on Screen Guild Theater: September 18, 194416th Academy Awards
1866 Gallatin County race riot
1912 racial conflict in Forsyth County, Georgia
1920 Alabama coal strike
1920 Duluth lynchings
1980 Miami riots
2006 Harris County, Texas hate crime assault
20th Century Fox
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Most Violent Year
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Star Is Born (1937 film)
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Awards
Across the Wide Missouri (film)
Alexander Boyd (county solicitor)
AllMovie
All the President's Men (film)
America's Black Holocaust Museum
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Crusade Against Lynching
American Film Institute
And you are lynching Negroes
Andrew Goodman (activist)
Anniston, Alabama
Anthony Quinn
Anti-lynching movement
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arthur C. Miller
Arthur St. Clair (minister)
Association of Southern Women for the Prevention of Lynching
Atlanta race riot
Attack on John Shillady
Barry Lyndon
Battle of Fort Pillow
Battle of Liberty Place
Battleground (film)
Bear River City, Wyoming
Beau Geste (1939 film)
Beaumont race riot of 1943
Becket (1964 film)
Beggars of Life
Benjamin Tillman
Berry Washington
Betrayal (1983 film)
Bicycle Thieves
Big Dan (film)
Big Nose George
Bill Sketoe
Billy Benedict
Bisbee massacre
Blood Alley
Booby prize
Bosley Crowther
Box Office Mojo
Brooke Hart
Brooks County, Georgia
Buffalo Bill (1944 film)
Cabaret (1972 film)
Call of the Wild (1935 film)
Camilla massacre
Casablanca (film)
Cedarbluff, Mississippi
Central Airport (film)
Centreville, Alabama
Century City
Chariots of Fire
Charles Thurber
Chatsworth, Los Angeles
Chinatown Nights (1929 film)
Chinese massacre of 1871
Chris-Pin Martin
Citizen Kane
Civil Rights Memorial
Clint Eastwood
Clubfoot George
Cole L. Blease
Colfax massacre
College Coach
Confessions of a Nazi Spy
Cupid's Fireman
Cyril J. Mockridge
Da 5 Bloods
Dana Andrews
Dances with Wolves
Dangerous Paradise (1930 film)
Danville race riot
Darby's Rangers
Darryl F. Zanuck
Days of Heaven
Death of Brandon McClelland
Death of Joseph Smith
Death of Shedrick Thompson
Denmark, South Carolina
Detroit race riot (1863)
Detroit race riot of 1863
Dick Rowland
Driving Miss Daisy
Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill
East St. Louis riots
Edward P. Costigan
Elaine race riot
Elbert Williams
Election riot of 1874
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
Ella Barksdale Brown
Ellen Watson
Ellenton riot
Ellicott City, Maryland
Emmett Till
Emmett Till Antilynching Act
Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act
Empire of the Sun (film)
Far from the Madding Crowd (1967 film)
Father Divine
Felix Hall
Felix Signoret
Female (1933 film)
Finding Neverland (film)
Flag Salute
Flossie Bailey
Forrest Gump
Francis Ford (actor)
Frank Conroy (actor)
Frank Little (unionist)
Fred Rochelle
Frisco Jenny
Fury (1936 film)
Gadsden, Alabama
Gallant Journey
Gandhi (film)
Gary Cooper
George Meeker
George W. Lee
Gods and Monsters (film)
Good-bye, My Lady (film)
Good Night, and Good Luck
Goodloe Sutton
Grand Lake, Colorado
Great Hanging at Gainesville
Green Book (film)
Gregory Peck
Hamburg massacre
Hang 'Em High
Hank Bell
Harriette Moore
Harris County, Georgia
Harrison's Reports
Harry Davenport (actor)
Harry Morgan
Harry T. Moore
Henry Fonda
Henry Plummer
Henry Smith (lynching victim)
Henry V (1944 film)
Her (film)
Heroes for Sale (film)
History of Marshall, Texas
Horrell Brothers
Howards End (film)
Hugo (film)
Hyrum Smith
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
Ida B. Wells
In Which We Serve
Indiana White Caps
Island in the Sky (1953 film)
It's a Big Country
It Happened One Night
Jack Trice
James Allen (collector)
James Cameron (activist)
James Chaney
James Clark (lynching victim)
James K. Vardaman
James Reeb
James Rolph
Jane Darwell
Jenkins County, Georgia, riot of 1919
Jessie Daniel Ames
Jim Crow laws
Jim McIlherron
Jim Miller (outlaw)
Jim Williams (militia leader)
Joe Pullen
Johannes Kunze
John Cecil Jones
John Hartfield
John J. Hoover
John T. Morgan
John Temple Graves
John Trotwood Moore
John W. Stephens
Josefa Segovia
Joseph Smith
Joseph Standing
Juan Moya
Judge Edward Aaron
Julian S. Carr
Julius Caesar (1953 film)
Justice for Victims of Lynching Act
Kemper County, Mississippi
Knoxville riot of 1919
Ku Klux Klan
L.A. Confidential (film)
LaFayette, Alabama
Ladies of the Mob
Lady of Burlesque
Lafayette Escadrille (film)
Lamar Smith (activist)
Lamar Trotti
Laurel and Hardy
Leigh Whipper
Leo Frank
Letters from Iwo Jima
Library of Congress
Licorice Pizza
Lilly Turner
List of lynching victims in the United States
Livermore, Kentucky
Livernois–Fenkell riot
Lone Pine, California
Longview race riot
Looking for Trouble (1934 film)
Louis Allen
Love Is a Racket
Lynching
Lynching in the United States
Lynching of Albert Williams
Lynching of Alfred Blount
Lynching of Amos Miller
Lynching of Anthony Crawford
Lynching of Austin Callaway
Lynching of Ballie Crutchfield
Lynching of Benjamin Thomas
Lynching of Benjamin and Mollie French
Lynching of Bernice Raspberry
Lynching of Claude Neal
Lynching of Cordie Cheek
Lynching of Dan Anderson
Lynching of David Jones
Lynching of David Wyatt
Lynching of Earnest Williams
Lynching of Ed Johnson
Lynching of Eliza Woods
Lynching of Ell Persons
Lynching of Ephraim Grizzard
Lynching of F. W. Stewart
Lynching of Francis McIntosh
Lynching of George Armwood
Lynching of George Meadows
Lynching of George Taylor
Lynching of George Ward
Lynching of George White
Lynching of Henry Lowry
Lynching of James Harvey and Joe Jordan
Lynching of Jay Lynch
Lynching of Jesse Washington
Lynching of Jim Taylor
Lynching of Jim and Mark Fox
Lynching of Jo Reed
Lynching of Joe Coe
Lynching of Joe Smith
Lynching of John Carter
Lynching of John Evans
Lynching of John Henry James
Lynching of Joseph H. McCoy
Lynching of Joseph Upchurch
Lynching of Joseph Vermillion
Lynching of Julia and Frazier Baker
Lynching of King Johnson
Lynching of L. Q. Ivy
Lynching of Laura and L. D. Nelson
Lynching of Leonard Woods
Lynching of Mack Charles Parker
Lynching of Marie Thompson
Lynching of Michael Donald
Lynching of Michael Green
Lynching of Nevlin Porter and Johnson Spencer
Lynching of Owen Flemming
Lynching of Paul Reed and Will Cato
Lynching of Paulo Boleta
Lynching of Raymond Byrd
Lynching of Raymond Gunn
Lynching of Richard Puryear
Lynching of Roosevelt Townes and Robert McDaniels
Lynching of Sam Hose
Lynching of Samuel Bierfield
Lynching of Samuel J. Bush
Lynching of Samuel Smith
Lynching of Stephen Williams
Lynching of Thomas Bradshaw
Lynching of Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith
Lynching of Thomas Williams
Lynching of Tom Payne
Lynching of Will Sherod
Lynching of William Andrews
Lynching of William Burns
Lynching of Willie Earle
Lynching of Willie James Howard
Lynching of Winston Pounds
Lynching of Zachariah Walker
Lynching of the Ruggles brothers
Lynching of the Walker family
Lynching postcard
Macbeth (1971 film)
Mad Max: Fury Road
Madison, Georgia
Magic Town
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Marais des Cygnes massacre
Marc Lawrence
March 14, 1891, lynchings
Margaret Hamilton (actress)
Martin C. Ansorge
Marty (film)
Mary Beth Hughes
Matthew Williams (laborer)
May 1918 lynchings
Maybe It's Love (1930 film)
Memphis riots of 1866
Men with Wings
Meridian race riot of 1871
Michael Schwerner
Midnight Mary
Mingo Jack
Mississippi Burning
Mississippi Cold Case
Mondak, Montana
Monsieur Verdoux
Moore's Ford lynchings
Moulin Rouge!
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Murder of Ahmaud Arbery
Murder of Betty Gardner
Murder of Carol Jenkins
Murder of Frank Morris
Murder of James Byrd Jr.
Murder of James Craig Anderson
Murder of Jimmie Lee Jackson
Murder of Kerrick Majors
Murder of Lemuel Penn
Murder of Mulugeta Seraw
Murder of Wharlest Jackson
Murder of Willie Edwards
Murder of Yusef Hawkins
Murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner
My Man and I
Mystic River (film)
NAACP
Nadir of American race relations
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review Award for Best Film
National Conference on Lynching
National Film Registry
National Memorial for Peace and Justice
National Museum of African American History and Culture
New Orleans massacre of 1866
New York City draft riots
Newberry Six lynchings
Night Must Fall (1937 film)
Night Nurse (1931 film)
No Country for Old Men
None but the Lonely Heart (film)
Not a Drum Was Heard
Nothing Sacred (film)
O'Day Short
Ocoee massacre
Omaha race riot of 1919
On the Waterfront
Opelousas massacre
Ordinary People
Other Men's Women
Paisan
Pana riot
Pancho Daniel
Parade (musical)
Patton (film)
Paul Hurst (actor)
Paul Robeson
People's Grocery lynchings
Perry race riot
Phoenix election riot
Posse comitatus (common law)
Pulaski riot
Pulp Fiction
Question 7
Quills (film)
Reaching for the Sun
Rebecca Latimer Felton
Reconstruction era
Recy Taylor
Red Shirts (United States)
Red Summer
Reds (film)
Reno Gang
Revisionist Western
Ring of Fear (film)
Robert Lewis (lynching victim)
Robert Prager
Robin Hood of El Dorado (film)
Rocky Springs, Mississippi
Rosewood massacre
Rotten Tomatoes
Roxie Hart (film)
Roy Belton
Safe in Hell
Schindler's List
Scottsboro Boys
Screen Guild Theater
Screws v. United States
Second Hand Love
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Sherman, Texas
Shine (film)
Shooting of Henry Marrow
Sidney Johnston Catts
Silent Parade
Slocum, Texas
Slumdog Millionaire
Small Town Girl (1936 film)
So Big (1932 film)
Sons and Lovers (film)
Southern Poverty Law Center
Springfield race riot of 1908
Stanley Andrews
Steve Long
Stingaree (1934 film)
Stone Mountain
Strange Fruit
Summer in Mississippi
Sundown town
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Tate County, Mississippi
Terms of Endearment
The Birth of a Nation
The Boob
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Cat's Pajamas
The Circus Cowboy
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Clansman: A Historical Romance of the Ku Klux Klan
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Conquerors (1932 film)
The Conversation
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great Man's Lady
The Gunfighter
The Happy Years
The Hatchet Man
The High and the Mighty (film)
The Hours (film)
The Informer (1935 film)
The Irishman
The Iron Curtain (film)
The Legacy Museum
The Legion of the Condemned
The Light That Failed (1939 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Man I Love (1929 film)
The Man Who Won (1923 film)
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Next Voice You Hear...
The Nun's Story (film)
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Outlaw
The Ox-Bow Incident (novel)
The Post (film)
The President Vanishes (film)
The Public Enemy
The Purchase Price
The Quiet Man
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Social Network
The Star Witness
The Sting
The Story of G.I. Joe
The True Glory
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The United States of Lyncherdom
The Vagabond Trail
Theodore G. Bilbo
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
They Won't Forget
Thibodaux massacre
This Man's Navy
Thomas Dixon Jr.
Thomas E. Watson
Thunder Birds (1942 film)
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Top Gun: Maverick
Topaze (1933 American film)
Toyah, Texas
Track of the Cat
Trial movies
Tulsa race massacre
Turner Classic Movies
Twentieth Century Fox Studios
United States
United States v. Shipp
Up in the Air (2009 film)
Variety (magazine)
Variety Hall shootout
Vendetta (1999 film)
Vernon Dahmer
Victor Kilian
Walter Van Tilburg Clark
War Production Board
Watkinsville lynching
Wesley Everest
Western (genre)
Westward the Women
When Husbands Flirt
Wild Boys of the Road
Willard Robertson
William "Froggie" James
William A. Wellman
William Eythe
William O. Bradley
Willits, California
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Wings (1927 film)
Woman Trap (1929 film)
Wyatt Outlaw
Yellow Sky
You Never Know Women
Young Eagles (film)
Zero Dark Thirty
http://www.filmsite.org/oxbo.html
http://www.ciakhollywood.com/hp/albafatale/
http://www.lafuriaumana.it/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=691:the-ox-bow-incident-1943&catid=25:rapporto-confidenziale&Itemid=27
http://www.afi.com/members/catalog/DetailView.aspx?s=&Movie=607
http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/434290/The-Ox-Bow-Incident/
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=EE05E7DF1730E46CBC4852DFB3668388659EDE
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v36976
https://www.loc.gov/film/nfr98.html
https://archive.org/download/ScreenGuildTheater/Sgt_44-09-18_ep212_Ox-Bow_Incident.mp3
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0036244/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/607
https://www.filmsite.org/oxbo.html
https://www.flickr.com/photos/chrisgold/8830698474/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1426269#P345
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1426269#P1562
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1426269#P2631
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1426269#P3593
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1426269#P1258
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/oxbow_incident
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt0036244/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1426269#identifiers
http://catalogo.bne.es/uhtbin/authoritybrowse.cgi?action=display&authority_id=XX4856057
https://viaf.org/viaf/222431515
https://www.allmovie.com/subgenre/psychological-western-d1669/releaseyear-desc/7
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/434290/enwp
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/2037-0431
https://books.google.com/books?id=WIZwZOz8LHsC&dq=aubrey+solomon+20th+century+fox&pg=PA212
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0036244/trivia/?item=tr1283084&ref_=ext_shr_lnk
