Top Gun: Maverick
Top Gun: Maverick is a 2022 American action drama film directed by Joseph Kosinski and written by Ehren Kruger, Eric Warren Singer, and Christopher McQuarrie from stories by Peter Craig and Justin Marks. The film is a sequel to the 1986 film Top Gun. Tom Cruise reprises his starring role as the naval aviator Maverick. It is based on the characters of the original film created by Jim Cash and Jack Epps Jr. It also stars Miles Teller, Jennifer Connelly, Jon Hamm, Glen Powell, Monica Barbaro, Lewis Pullman, Ed Harris and Val Kilmer, who reprises his role as Iceman. The story involves Maverick confronting his past while training a group of younger Top Gun graduates, including the son of his deceased best friend, for a dangerous mission.
Development of a Top Gun sequel was announced in 2010 by Paramount Pictures. Tom Cruise, along with producer Jerry Bruckheimer and director Tony Scott, were asked to return. Craig wrote a draft of the screenplay in 2012, but the project stalled when Scott died later that year. Top Gun: Maverick was later dedicated to Scott's memory. Production resumed in 2017, after Kosinski was hired to direct. Principal photography, which involved the use of IMAX-certified 6K full-frame cameras, took place from May 2018 to April 2019 in California, Washington and Maryland. It was initially scheduled to be released July 12, 2019, but it was delayed several times due to its complex action sequences and later the COVID-19 pandemic. During the pandemic, several streaming companies attempted to purchase the streaming rights to the film from Paramount, but all offers were declined on the orders of Cruise, who insisted that it be released exclusively in theaters.Top Gun: Maverick premiered at CinemaCon on April 28, 2022, and was theatrically released by Paramount Pictures in the United States on May 27, 2022. The film was acclaimed by critics, with many calling it better than the original. It won Best Film from the National Board of Review and was also named one of the top-ten films of 2022 by the American Film Institute. Top Gun: Maverick was nominated for six awards at the 95th Academy Awards (including Best Picture), winning Best Sound, and received numerous other accolades. The film grossed $1.496 billion worldwide, making it the second-highest-grossing film of 2022 and the highest-grossing of Cruise's career.


== Plot ==
More than 30 years after graduating from Top Gun, United States Navy Captain Pete "Maverick" Mitchell is a decorated test pilot whose repeated insubordination has kept him from flag rank. When Rear Admiral Chester "Hammer" Cain plans to cancel Maverick's hypersonic "Darkstar" scramjet program, Maverick unilaterally changes the target speed for that day's test from Mach 9 to the final contract specification of Mach 10. However, the prototype is destroyed when he cannot resist pushing beyond Mach 10.
After the flight, Cain tells Maverick that he would be grounded if not for Admiral Tom "Iceman" Kazansky, Maverick's friend and former Top Gun rival. Iceman, now commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet, has assigned Maverick to the Top Gun school at NAS North Island.
The Navy has been ordered to destroy an unsanctioned uranium enrichment plant before it becomes operational. The plant, located in an underground bunker at the end of a canyon, is defended by surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), GPS jammers, and fifth-generation Su-57 fighters as well as older F-14 Tomcats. Maverick devises a plan employing two pairs of F/A-18E/F Super Hornets armed with laser-guided bombs, but instead of participating in the strike, he is to train an elite group of Top Gun graduates assembled by Air Boss Vice Admiral Beau "Cyclone" Simpson.
Maverick dogfights his skeptical students and prevails in every contest, winning their respect. Two of the students clash: Lieutenants Jake "Hangman" Seresin and Bradley "Rooster" Bradshaw—son of Maverick's deceased best friend and RIO Nick "Goose" Bradshaw. Rooster dislikes Hangman's cavalier attitude, while Hangman criticizes Rooster's cautious flying. Maverick reunites with former girlfriend Penny Benjamin, to whom he reveals that he promised Rooster's dying mother that Rooster would not become a pilot. Rooster, unaware of the promise, angrily resents Maverick for blocking his Naval Academy application—impeding his military career—and blames him for his father's death. Maverick is reluctant to further interfere with Rooster's career, but the alternative is to send him on the extremely dangerous mission. He tells his doubts to Iceman, who has terminal throat cancer. Iceman tells him, "It's time to let go" and reassures him that both the Navy and Rooster need Maverick.
Iceman dies soon after, and after an F/A-18F crashes during training, Cyclone removes Maverick as instructor. He relaxes the mission parameters, so they are easier to execute but make escape much more difficult. During Cyclone's announcement, Maverick makes an unauthorized flight through the course with the original parameters, proving that it can be done. Despite the act of insubordination, Cyclone reluctantly appoints Maverick as team leader.
Maverick flies the lead F/A-18E, accompanied by a buddy-lasing F/A-18F flown by Lieutenant Natasha "Phoenix" Trace and WSO Lieutenant Robert "Bob" Floyd. Rooster leads the second strike pair, which includes Lieutenant Reuben "Payback" Fitch and WSO Lieutenant Mickey "Fanboy" Garcia. The four jets launch from an aircraft carrier, and Tomahawk cruise missiles destroy the nearby air base as they approach. The teams destroy the plant, but the SAMs open fire during their escape. Rooster runs out of countermeasures, and Maverick sacrifices his plane to protect him from an incoming strike. Believing Maverick to be dead, all jets are ordered back to the carrier, but Rooster disobeys and returns to find that Maverick ejected and is being pursued by an Mi-24 attack helicopter. After destroying the gunship, Rooster is shot down by a SAM and ejects. The two rendezvous and steal an F-14 from the damaged air base. Maverick and Rooster destroy two intercepting Su-57s, but a third attacks as they run out of ammunition and countermeasures. Hangman unexpectedly arrives in time to shoot it down, and the planes return safely.
Later, Rooster helps Maverick work on his P-51 Mustang. Rooster looks at a photo of their mission's success, pinned alongside a photo of his late father and a young Maverick, as Penny and Maverick fly off in the P-51.


== Cast ==

Anthony Edwards, Meg Ryan, as well as Aaron and Adam Weis appear as the Bradshaw family in archive footage from Top Gun, along with Kelly McGillis as Charlotte "Charlie" Blackwood.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
In 1990, during the promotion of Born on the Fourth of July (1989), Tom Cruise dismissed the notion of a sequel to Top Gun (1986) as "irresponsible". Paramount Pictures began development on the film in 2010 after making offers to Jerry Bruckheimer and Tony Scott to create a sequel to Top Gun with Tom Cruise reprising his role. When asked about his idea for a new Top Gun film, Scott replied, "This world fascinated me, because it's so different from what it was originally. But I don't want to do a remake. I don't want to do a reinvention. I want to do a new movie." It was reported that the film would focus on the end of the dogfighting era, the role of drones in modern aerial warfare, and would see Cruise's character, Maverick, fly an F/A-18E Super Hornet. Following Scott's suicide in 2012, the sequel's future became uncertain, but producer Jerry Bruckheimer remained committed to the project, especially given interest expressed by Cruise and Kilmer.Cruise revealed in June 2017 that the sequel would be titled Top Gun: Maverick, noting that he did not want a number in the title. He added that the film is "going to be a competition film, similar to the first one", but clarified it as "a progression for Maverick". By July 2017, Joseph Kosinski was announced as the director, after previously collaborating with Cruise on Oblivion (2013). Kosinski met with Cruise on the set of Mission: Impossible – Fallout (2018), providing a lookbook, a poster, and a title, Top Gun: Maverick, prior to his hiring. Cruise then contacted Jim Gianopulos and requested to make the film.On June 19, 2019, at CineEurope in Barcelona, attendees were able to watch for the first time some early footage of the film from a special Paramount presentation. During the presentation the President of International Theatrical Distribution Mark Viane and co-president of Worldwide Marketing and Distribution Mary Daily appeared in flight clothes, as a part of the promotion. In 2019, China's Tencent invested 12.5% of the film but later pulled out of the project at the end of that year over concerns that the film's themes could anger the Chinese government.


=== Writing ===
By mid-2010, Christopher McQuarrie received an offer to write the sequel's screenplay, which was rumored to have Cruise's character Maverick in a smaller role. The following year, Ashley Edward Miller and Zack Stentz were credited as screenwriters on the project. The studio would later move onto Peter Craig to draft a new script under Scott's direction in March 2012. However, the project was unexpectedly stalled due to Scott's suicide in August of that year. In March 2014, Bruckheimer said the filmmakers were taking a new approach, which involved pilots being rendered obsolete by drones.In September 2014, the sequel was officially revived. Justin Marks entered negotiations to write the screenplay. Marks said that the sequel to Top Gun was his "dream project" and that the original was "an iconic film in his memory" that inspired him to write screenplays. He researched the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter to gain insight into "how Top Gun would be represented in the current period".

Scott had apparently finalized the script and begun scouting locations. He and Cruise toured Naval Air Station Fallon, Nevada, a week before his death. The Hollywood Reporter said the Top Gun sequel was one of three directing projects in "advanced development".During scripting discussions in Paris in 2017, where Cruise was shooting for Mission: Impossible – Fallout, Kosinski pitched two ideas to Cruise. The first focused on the severed relationship between Maverick and Goose's son, set against a dangerous combat mission. The second focused on Maverick's current place in the Navy as part of the "Darkstar" program and the secrecy surrounding it. With Kosinski in place as director, Only the Brave (2017) screenwriter Eric Warren Singer boarded the film to rewrite the script by August 2017. In October 2018, McQuarrie, a frequent collaborator of Cruise, was brought in for rewrites during production. McQuarrie opted to mostly ignore the first film during the writing process; he also flew with the Blue Angels in preparation. By January 2020, final screenplay credits were given to Ehren Kruger, Singer, and McQuarrie, while story credit was attributed to Craig and Marks.


=== Casting ===
Cruise's involvement in Top Gun: Maverick was announced in January 2016. He was paid between $12 and $14 million plus a portion of the film's box office gross, which totaled more than $100 million. Val Kilmer, now cancer-free, had campaigned on his Facebook page to reprise his role in the film. In June 2018, TheWrap reported that he would appear in the film. While Bruckheimer and the filmmakers wanted to bring Kilmer back, Cruise insisted on it. A trailer released in March 2022 featured a photograph of Kilmer wearing a uniform of a four-star admiral. In July 2018, Miles Teller was cast in the role of Goose's son, against Nicholas Hoult and Glen Powell. Later that month, Jennifer Connelly joined the film's cast to play a single mother running a bar near the naval base.In August 2018, Powell joined the cast in a pilot trainee role that was enlarged for him, having impressed Cruise, Bruckheimer, and executives at Paramount and Skydance Media, with his auditions. He was cast as the arrogant "Hangman" (originally named "Slayer" when he read the script). Powell was initially unimpressed by the prospect of taking the role, feeling the character was a unidimensional "dick garnish" and a "Navy Draco Malfoy" with no payoff nor reason to exist other than adding conflict to "Rooster"'s character arc. Cruise, Bruckheimer, Kosinski, and McQuarrie managed to convince him that he could shape his performance to make "Hangman" a more well-rounded character. Cruise advised Powell on body language in different cultures, helping him to play "Hangman" so that global audiences would emotionally connect with the character. In the same month, Monica Barbaro, Thomasin McKenzie, Charles Parnell, Jay Ellis, Bashir Salahuddin, Danny Ramirez, Ed Harris, Jon Hamm, and Lewis Pullman joined the cast of the film; Barbaro, Pullman, Ellis, and Ramirez portrayed aviator trainees, while McKenzie was to portray the daughter of Connelly's character.Hamm signed onto the film before he was given an official offer or script. In September 2018, Manny Jacinto joined the cast. In October 2018, Kara Wang, Jack Schumacher, Greg Tarzan Davis, Jake Picking, Raymond Lee, Jean Louisa Kelly and Lyliana Wray joined the cast; Wray replaced McKenzie, who dropped out of the film after signing onto Lost Girls (2020). In November 2018, Chelsea Harris joined the cast. Kelly McGillis, Meg Ryan and Aaron and Adam Weis, all of whom appeared in the original film, were not asked to appear in the sequel.According to an interview with Vanity Fair, Lewis Hamilton was offered a fighter pilot role because of his friendship with Cruise but turned down the offer due to his Formula One commitments.


=== Filming ===
To create the illusion that the actors were piloting the jets during flying scenes, the producers paid the Navy $11,374 per flight hour for F/A-18E (single seat) and F/A-18F (dual seat) Super Hornets and pilots to fly them. For external shots, real Navy pilots flew the E version. For shots of the actors in flight, the F version was used with the actual pilot in the front seat. One F/A-18F was rigged with special cameras to film an actor in the back seat. Cruise designed a three-month "boot camp" to train the actors with flying roles to get them used to aerobatics and high g-forces, as well as build the spatial awareness they would need to operate the camera equipment. Some of the training was required by the Navy for passengers in tactical jets, including underwater evacuation. Barbaro said the cast endured aerobatics riding in the Extra 300L flown by Chuck Coleman, including right before flights in the F/A-18F, to ensure their bodies had the required tolerance. She also praised the female pilots she had worked with during the filming process, and commented that while the "military aviation community [is] progressive, there's no way that [sexism] doesn't still exist in little moments here and there. It's par for the course for women in historically male-dominated spaces. So I was glad we kept that in." The actors also had to learn lighting, cinematography, and editing to properly run the cameras, because, as Bruckheimer put it, "when they're up in the jet, they have to direct themselves, essentially."Preliminary production on the film officially started on May 30, 2018, in San Diego. The crew filmed aerial shots at Naval Air Station Fallon. In late August, a 15-person film crew from Paramount and Bruckheimer Films shot flight deck operations aboard the Norfolk-based aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln. In mid-February 2019, Cruise and the production crew were sighted on board USS Theodore Roosevelt at NAS North Island. In March, filming in the Cascade Mountains was completed at Naval Air Station Whidbey Island in Oak Harbor, Washington, where routes were scouted by helicopter and the L-39 before filming the F/A-18s. On June 19, 2019, Miles Teller revealed in an interview that he had finished filming two days earlier. Principal photography was scheduled until April 15, 2019, in San Diego, Lemoore, China Lake, Chico, and Lake Tahoe in California; Seattle; and Patuxent River, Maryland. The low-pass scene with Ed Harris was filmed at China Lake with flying a Blue Angels plane at less than 50 ft (15 m) around 450 kn (520 mph; 830 km/h), which on the 20th and last pass pulled roofing material from the guard shack flying off held only by romex cable. The post-production and editing works were supervised by Kosinski at his home during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.The film was shot in IMAX format using IMAX-certified Sony Venice 6K full frame cameras. Kosinski said that the team spent more than a year with Navy forces to use the IMAX cameras inside the cockpit, with four cameras facing toward the actors and two facing forward, in addition to cameras mounted all over the exteriors of the aircraft. He said "the audience should feel the authenticity, strain, speed and gravitational forces, something that cannot be achieved through soundstage or visual effects, which needed a tremendous amount of effort and work." NAVAIR engineers used wind tunnel testing and computer modeling to rig cameras to the aircraft to withstand the speeds and g-forces sustained during maneuvering and carrier landings while maintaining safety in the event of ejection. The crew shot the aerial footage outside the F/A-18s with gimbal-stabilized cameras on three platforms: a nose-mounted rig on one of two modified Aero L-39 Albatros that could film at 350 kn (403 mph; 648 km/h) and 3 g, nose- and tail-mounted cameras on an Embraer Phenom 300, and a nose-mounted rig on an Airbus AS350 helicopter. More than 800 hours of aerial footage was shot for the film, exceeding the combined footage shot for the films in the Lord of the Rings trilogy.The steel structure was assembled off-site for visual inspection, then dismantled and re-built on set.The Hard Deck bar, inspired by the real-life "I-Bar," was built from scratch, right on the beach in Naval Air Station North Island in Coronado, CA 


=== Aircraft ===
For most of the planes including the F/A-18E/F, the production crew acquired 20 working aircraft from all over the country. Hindle said that Kosinski had made specifications for every detail during design, including the helmets, suits, props, and several others.


==== Darkstar ====
The fictional "Darkstar" aircraft was designed with help from engineers from Lockheed Martin and its Skunk Works division. A full-scale mockup of the aircraft was built and filmed at China Lake. Kosinski said, "The reason we approached Skunk Works is because I wanted to make the most realistic hypersonic aircraft we possibly could. In fact, as you saw, we built it full-scale in cooperation with them. But the reason it looks so real is because it was the engineers from Skunk Works who helped us design it. So those are the same people who are working on real aircraft who helped us design Darkstar for this film." Lockheed denied that Darkstar is related to the uncrewed Lockheed Martin SR-72, whose existence the company has never confirmed.


==== F-14 ====
Production designer Jeremy Hindle said that using a F-14 Tomcat (which is featured in the first film) would have been difficult. "There are no F-14s that fly because they [have been decommissioned in the U.S.] and all the engines have been taken out of them." He said that they were not able to use the active F-14 Tomcats in Iran, the only other country that acquired the aircraft, due to sanctions. The U.S. scuttled or disabled its vast fleet of F-14s once they were retired to prevent the illicit export of spare parts.With help from the Navy, the production team secured one F-14A from the San Diego Air & Space Museum in California. Hindle described further challenges, including dismantling and shipping the plane's components, and making the aircraft as functional as possible, though still without engines.


=== Post-production ===
VFX artist Fred Lyn said CGI was used extensively in the film. The F-14 and Su-57 were visualized entirely by computer, while the F/A-18 dogfighting and final strike scenes were shot with a single jet, producing footage that was used to create multiple jets onscreen.The film had about 2,400 VFX shots, all produced under visual effects supervisor Ryan Tudhope. Most work was done by Method Studios and MPC Film, though Lola VFX and Blind provided the 2D motion graphics, training visualizations, and the jet's head-up displays.
Skywalker Sound worked on sound design and temp mixing for the film. They created aviation sound effects, working closely with GE Aviation, a jet engine manufacturer out of Cincinnati. Final sound editing and mixing n Dolby Atmos and IMAX was handled by London-based Soundbyte Studios and Twickenham Film Studios. Recording mixers Chris Burdon and Mark Taylor worked in two theaters with different audio configurations to complete the mixes, which took place in June and July 2020.After his treatment and operation for throat cancer, Val Kilmer lost his ability to speak effectively. In 2021, he worked with Sonantic, a UK-based software company that specializes in voice synthesis, to digitally recreate his voice using AI technology and archived audio recordings of his voice. The collaboration with Sonantic led to a successful vocal model program that Kilmer could apply in future projects. For Top Gun: Maverick, however, this technology was not used. Director Joseph Kosinski said in an interview that they used Kilmer's actual voice, digitally altering it to increase clarity.Footage from the original film was used in a scene where Maverick watches Rooster playing "Great Balls of Fire" on the piano, invoking memories of Goose's family and death. The footage was used as a flashback, to help explain the characters' relationship and to deepen the emotional conflicts involved. This was not planned in the original script; Kosinski introduced the idea in the film editing phase.


== Music ==

Top Gun composer Harold Faltermeyer reprised his role, being joined by Lady Gaga, OneRepublic, and Hans Zimmer. The soundtrack was produced by Lorne Balfe. The soundtrack was released on May 27, 2022, through Interscope Records and Paramount Music. It was promoted by two singles, "Hold My Hand" by Lady Gaga and "I Ain't Worried" by OneRepublic. From the first film, the score also incorporates elements of the original "Top Gun Anthem", and the song "Danger Zone", composed by Giorgio Moroder and sung by Kenny Loggins.


== Marketing ==
The film's first teaser trailer premiered during a surprise appearance by Cruise at the 2019 San Diego Comic Con on July 18, 2019. The first trailer received high praise from fans, with many lauding the return of the series and some comparing it to Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker. The Hollywood Reporter wrote that some fans noticed that the flag of the Republic of China (the flag used by the government of the Republic of China based on the island of Taiwan) and the Flag of Japan were missing from the flight jacket of Cruise's character and accused Paramount of removing it to appease China-based co-financier Tencent Pictures. However, the Republic of China and Japanese flags were later restored, as Tencent would end up pulling out of the production, leading to them being uncredited in the final film and, instead, the producers chose to not release the movie in China. The second trailer was released in December 2019, and a new Snapchat filter for the film was introduced by Paramount, to engage "young-generation audiences".In February 2020, toy manufacturer Matchbox (owned by Mattel) announced that it was releasing a series of Top Gun die-cast models and products, including the F-14 Tomcat, F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, and the P-51 Mustang, as well as role play items. They were scheduled for public release on June 1, 2020, despite the delayed theatrical release. In June 2020, plastic model manufacturer Revell released a series of 1/48 scale Top Gun plastic models, including an F-14A Tomcat and an F/A-18E Super Hornet based upon the aircraft in the movie. These are versions of previous Revell offerings with modified decals and markings. In July 2020, Hasbro announced a Top Gun-themed Transformers toy, "Maverick", which was released later in the year. Hasbro later re-released the toy as a Walmart exclusive to tie into the film's final release date.
On August 26, 2021, the first 13 minutes of the film were previewed at CinemaCon along with a new trailer with Tom Cruise marking his presence virtually at the event. In January 2022, CBS Sports released a new clip from the film, coinciding with the AFC Championship Game between the Kansas City Chiefs and the Cincinnati Bengals. In February 2022, the final trailer of the film tied to Porsche was aired before Super Bowl LVI. In April 2022, Project ACES, the developers of the Ace Combat series, announced the release of an aircraft collaboration DLC for Ace Combat 7: Skies Unknown with Top Gun: Maverick, released on May 26, one day before the film's release. A free expansion based on Top Gun Maverick was also released for Microsoft Flight Simulator on the same day, containing the F/A-18E/F Superhornet and fictional "Darkstar" planes as playable aircraft. An interactive website was also launched on the same month. On May 23, Cruise collaborated with The Late Late Show host James Corden for recreating a fighter sequence as a part of promotions.A three-week promotional tour was conducted in Mexico City, Tokyo, Cannes, London, San Diego and Los Angeles. Event Cinemas announced Top Gun: Maverick Collector Combo, featuring a medium large salt-popcorn with refreshments in a collector cup, being marketed with stills featuring Cruise. Other marketing deals were arranged with Applebee's restaurant chains and Vudu.


== Release ==


=== Theatrical ===
Top Gun: Maverick was released theatrically by Paramount Pictures in the United States on May 27, 2022, with advance screenings starting the day before. It was originally scheduled to be released on July 12, 2019, but was delayed to June 26, 2020, in order to shoot several complex action sequences. By March 2020, Paramount moved the film up two days early on June 24, 2020, and it was then moved to December 23 due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic declared by the World Health Organization. On July 23, 2020, the film was delayed again to July 2, 2021, due in part to scheduling conflicts with Cruise, as well as the recent delays of Mulan and Tenet due to the rise of COVID-19 cases, and was further delayed to November 19, 2021, before finalizing the May 2022 release date.The film had its world premiere at CinemaCon on April 28, 2022 which was followed by a global premiere hosted at the San Diego Civic Theatre in San Diego, on May 4, which was also streamed live through YouTube. It also screened at the Cannes Film Festival on May 18 in an Official Selection Screening, where it received a five-minute standing ovation from the audience. The Cannes premiere included a tribute to Cruise and his career. The following day it had its UK premiere at the Royal Film Performance at London's Odeon Luxe Leicester Square in aid of the Film & TV Charity. The film was the last Royal Film Performance of Queen Elizabeth II's reign as she died later that same year. ScreenX theaters and AMC Theatres held Early Access Event screenings at limited locations across the United States on May 24, 2022.


=== Home media ===
Apple TV+ attempted to purchase the distribution rights to Top Gun: Maverick, but Paramount declined to sell them. When asked at the film's CinemaCon premiere about Apple and other streaming companies attempting to purchase the distribution rights, Bruckheimer said that the film had always had a big-screen destination. At the film's premiere at Cannes, Cruise also denied that the film was going to streaming. Despite the model that most films debut on streaming 45 days after their theatrical releases, Paramount decided to keep Top Gun: Maverick in theaters for an extended run due to Cruise's insistence and the successive week-to-week box office results of the film. The film was released digitally in standard definition, high definition and UHD on August 23, 2022, followed by the Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD releases on November 1, 2022, in the United States and October 31, 2022, in the United Kingdom. It includes the expanded aspect ratio of 1.90:1 in select sequences as seen in IMAX screenings, four featurettes on the making of the film, Cruise discussing his career at the 75th Cannes Film Festival and two music videos of the songs featured in the film.Paramount+ and SkyShowtime (under the joint venture between both Paramount Global and Sky Group) made Top Gun: Maverick available to stream on December 22, 2022, as part of a customer's subscription to either service.  In the United States, Top Gun: Maverick became the most-watched film to debut on Paramount+.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Top Gun: Maverick grossed $718.7 million in the United States and Canada, and $777 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.496 billion. The film became the highest-grossing film of Cruise's career on June 17, 2022, after crossing $800 million worldwide. On June 26, the film crossed $1 billion, becoming the second film to do so during the pandemic era. It is the second-highest-grossing film released in 2022 (behind Avatar: The Way of Water). Sonny Bunch, writing for The Washington Post, argued that the film's financial success along with that of Spider-Man: No Way Home demonstrates that securing a theatrical release in China is not mandatory for a Hollywood film to be profitable. Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $391.1 million, accounting for production budgets, marketing, talent participations, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it second on their list of 2022's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".In the United States and Canada, Top Gun: Maverick was the highest-grossing film released in 2022. It grossed $126.7 million in its opening three-day weekend and $160.5 million over the four-day Memorial Day weekend, finishing first at the box office and nearly doubling Cruise's previous career-best. The film also had the largest Memorial Day four-day opening weekend. In its second weekend, it grossed $90 million; the 29% drop was the smallest-ever for a film that had an opening of over $100 million, surpassing Shrek 2 (33% drop in its second weekend from a $108 million debut in May 2004). The film was dethroned by newcomer Jurassic World Dominion in its third weekend, though still grossed $51.9 million. The film remained in the top five at the box office throughout its first ten weeks of release. The film finally dropped out of the top five at the box office in its 11th weekend, finishing sixth with $7 million. In its 12th weekend the film was re-released in over 400 theaters and made $7.1 million, returning to second place. In its 15th weekend, the film made $6 million (and a total of $7.9 million over the four-day Labor Day frame), returning to the top of the box office. Box office analysts attributed the film's longevity at the box office to positive critical reviews and word of mouth.Outside the US and Canada, the film grossed $124 million from 62 markets in its opening weekend. It was Cruise's biggest opening ever in 32 of those markets and Paramount's best opening for a live-action film in 18 of them. The largest markets in its opening weekend were the United Kingdom ($19.4 million), France ($11.7 million), Australia ($10.7 million), Japan ($9.7 million), and Germany ($6.5 million). The film had the best debut of Cruise's career in the Middle East ($6.3 million), Brazil ($5.3 million), the Netherlands ($2.4 million), Sweden ($2.2 million), Belgium ($1.7 million), New Zealand ($1.4 million), Poland ($1.2 million), Argentina ($1.2 million), Finland ($1.1 million), and Portugal ($770,000). IMAX accounted for $10.4 million of its opening weekend outside the US and Canada. The following weekend, it made $85.8 million, a mere 16% drop that included $18.5 million from IMAX screenings. As of September 18, 2022, the top markets are the United Kingdom ($102 million), Japan ($93.6 million), South Korea ($67.2 million), Australia ($64.3 million), and France ($58.2 million).


=== Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 96% of 470 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.20/10. The website's consensus reads: "Top Gun: Maverick pulls off a feat even trickier than a 4G inverted dive, delivering a long-belated sequel that surpasses its predecessor in wildly entertaining style." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 78 out of 100, based on 63 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare "A+" grade on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported 96% of audience members gave it a positive score, with 84% saying they would definitely recommend it.Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood called the sequel better than the original movie. The New York Times-based critic A. O. Scott called it a "thin, over-strenuous and sometimes very enjoyable movie" and "an earnest statement of the thesis that movies can and should be great." Peter Bradshaw wrote in The Guardian that "Cruise presides over some surprising differences from his first outing as the navy pilot hotshot in a film that's missing the homoerotic tensions of the 80s original." Alonso Duralde of TheWrap wrote that the movie "counts as a worthy sequel in that it succeeds and fails in many of the same ways as the original."Entertainment.ie's Brian Lloyd's 4-star review said the film "exceeds with flying colours" and "exists in a world that is all of its own making. There are golden sunsets, perfectly crisp white t-shirts, exquisitely coiffed hair, and long-held flames of romance that make it all impossible to resist." Clarrise Loughery, chief editor of The Independent, wrote that the film is "as thrilling as blockbusters get. It's the kind of edge-of-your-seat, fist-pumping spectacular that can unite an entire room full of strangers sitting in the dark and leave them with a wistful tear in their eye." Richard Brody of The New Yorker wrote, "The new film, less of a sequel than a renovation, infuses the 1986 drama of airborne combat with today's politics." Tomris Laffly of RogerEbert.com wrote, "Equally worthy of that big screen is the emotional strokes of Maverick that pack an unexpected punch."


==== Response from filmmakers ====
On August 3, 2022, filmmaker Quentin Tarantino called Top Gun: Maverick "fantastic", as the film, alongside Steven Spielberg's West Side Story, "provided a true cinematic spectacle, the kind that I'd almost thought that I wasn't going to see anymore." As a long-time admirer of the original Top Gun director, the late Tony Scott, he added: "There was just this lovely, lovely aspect because I love both Tony Scott's cinema so much, and I love Tony so much that that's as close as we're ever going to get to seeing one more Tony Scott movie ... The respect and the love of Tony was in every frame. It was almost in every decision. It was consciously right there, but in this really cool way that was really respectful."Ridley Scott, Tony's older brother and whom Cruise worked with in the 1985 film Legend, was given a private screening for Maverick. Bruckheimer stated, "One of the most heartwarming things I experienced is when we showed the movie to Tony's brother, Ridley. He was laudatory in his praise for the film and the kind of care that Tom took to honor Tony throughout the movie. That was foremost in everybody's mind." However, Fede Álvarez, director of Alien: Romulus (produced by Scott), later stated that Scott had more negative feelings on Maverick. Álvarez stated "I asked him about the new 'Top Gun' and he's like 'meh.' I'm like, 'What are you talking about?' And he was like, 'My brother's was original and this is like eh.' He really respected it, but you could see how tough he was."


=== Role of the U.S. military ===
The film was actively supported and influenced by the United States Department of Defense and the United States Navy to present the U.S. military in a positive light and aid in recruitment and retention. The U.S. Air Force also ran recruitment ads before the film's screenings. This led some critics, scholars and journalists to criticize the film as propaganda.


=== Accolades ===

At the 95th Academy Awards, Top Gun: Maverick received nominations for Best Picture, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Original Song, Best Film Editing, and Best Visual Effects; and won Best Sound. The film's other nominations include four British Academy Film Awards, six Critics' Choice Movie Awards (winning one), and two Golden Globe Awards. It received two National Board of Review Awards and was named one of the top-ten films of 2022 by the American Film Institute.


== Lawsuit ==
In June 2022, the family of Israeli author Ehud Yonay, who wrote the California article "Top Guns" in May 1983 that inspired the first film, sued Paramount for copyright infringement over the release of Top Gun: Maverick and sought damages as well as an injunction against the film's distribution. Jerry Bruckheimer produced the original film, whose screenplay was written by Jim Cash (died 2000) and Jack Epps Jr.; all three men participated in the sequel. According to the lawsuit, Paramount had obtained exclusive film rights to Yonay's article but ignored the 35-year copyright law, wherein the rights reverted to Yonay's widow Shosh and son Yuval in January 2020 after the writer's death in 2012.The lawsuit claims that Maverick contains elements similar to the original article and that Paramount continued with the filming, even after receiving notice of the copyright's termination. The film distributor considers most of the sequel to have been complete before then and denies that Maverick is derived from Yonay's article.


== Future ==
In May 2022, Teller revealed that he had been pitching a sequel, which would be tentatively titled Top Gun: Rooster and centered around his character, to Paramount Pictures. By July of the same year, he stated that he has been having ongoing discussions with Cruise regarding a sequel.


== See also ==
List of film sequels by box-office performance
List of media set in San Diego
Military–entertainment complex – Cooperation between the military and entertainment industries


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Top Gun: Maverick at IMDb/Film
12 Strong
12 Years a Slave (film)
2022 Cannes Film Festival
2022 in film
300 (film)
6 Underground (film)
95th Academy Awards
A. O. Scott
AARP Movies for Grownups Award for Best Movie for Grownups
AFC Championship Game
AMC Theatres
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Most Violent Year
A Passage to India (film)
A Place in the Sun (1951 film)
A Room with a View (1985 film)
A Star Is Born (2018 film)
Aaron and Adam Weis
About Schmidt
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Song
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Ace Combat
Ace Combat 7: Skies Unknown
Action drama
Admiral (United States)
Aero L-39 Albatros
Air (2023 film)
Aladdin (1992 Disney film)
Alien: Romulus
All the President's Men (film)
Alonso Duralde
Altered Carbon (TV series)
Amadeus (film)
American Beauty (1999 film)
American Film Institute
American Gigolo
American Sniper
Amy Hennig
An Officer and a Gentleman
Annihilation (film)
Anthony Edwards (actor)
Apple TV+
Applebee's
Arashi: Castles of Sin
Archangel (2017 video game)
Arlington Road
Armageddon (1998 film)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Artificial intelligence
As Good as It Gets
Ashley Edward Miller
Ask the Dust (film)
Aspect ratio (image)
Avatar: The Way of Water
Avatar (2009 film)
Avengers: Endgame
Avengers: Infinity War
BBC News
Back to the Future
Bad Boys (1995 film)
Bad Boys II
Bad Boys for Life
Bad Company (2002 film)
Barcelona
Barry Lyndon
Bashir Salahuddin
Batman (1989 film)
Baywatch (film)
Becket (1964 film)
Being John Malkovich
Being Tom Cruise
Belfast (film)
Betrayal (1983 film)
Beverly Hills Cop
Beverly Hills Cop: Axel F
Beverly Hills Cop II
Bicycle Thieves
Billy Elliot
Birdman (film)
BlacKkKlansman
Black Hawk Down (film)
Black Panther (film)
Blood & Chocolate (film)
Blu-ray
Blue Angels
Blush (2021 film)
Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornet
Bohemian Rhapsody (film)
Born on the Fourth of July (film)
Box Office Mojo
British Academy Film Awards
British Board of Film Classification
Brokeback Mountain
Business Insider
CNA (TV network)
CNN Entertainment
COVID-19
COVID-19 pandemic
COVID-19 pandemic lockdown
Cabaret (1972 film)
California
California (magazine, defunct 1991)
Cannes
Capote (film)
Captain (United States O-6)
Cascade Mountains
Casino Royale (2006 film)
Character arc
Chariots of Fire
Charles Parnell (actor)
Chelsea Harris
Chico, CA
Chido Nwokocha
Chief warrant officer (United States)
Christopher McQuarrie
Chuck Coleman
Cincinnati Bengals
CineEurope
CinemaCon
CinemaScore
Citizen Kane
Claudio Miranda
Collider (website)
ComingSoon.net
Commander, Naval Air Forces
Commander, U.S. Pacific Fleet
Computational fluid dynamics
Computer-generated imagery
Con Air
Condor (TV series)
Confessions of a Nazi Spy
Confessions of a Shopaholic (film)
Conversation Piece (film)
Copyright law in the United States
Coyote Ugly (film)
Crimson Tide (film)
Critics' Choice Movie Awards
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon
Cruise/Wagner Productions
DVD
Da 5 Bloods
Dancer in the Dark
Dances with Wolves
Danger Zone (song)
Dangerous Minds
Danny Ramirez
David Ellison
Days of Heaven
Days of Thunder
Deadline Hollywood
Deadpool (film)
Defiance (1980 film)
Deliver Us from Evil (2014 film)
Die Hard
Dietland (TV series)
Divergent (film)
Dogfight
Dolby Atmos
Don Granger
Don Simpson/Jerry Bruckheimer Films
Draco Malfoy
Dream House (2011 film)
Dreamgirls (film)
Driving Miss Daisy
Dumbo (2019 film)
Déjà Vu (2006 film)
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
Ed Harris
Eddie Hamilton
Edge of Tomorrow
Ehren Kruger
Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom
Elizabethtown (film)
Embraer Phenom 300
Empire (magazine)
Empire of the Sun (film)
Enemy of the State (film)
Enriched uranium
Entertainment.ie
Eric Warren Singer
Ethan Hunt
Eurocopter AS350 Écureuil
Event Cinemas
Everything Everywhere All at Once
Evita (1996 film)
Extra 300L
F-14
F-14 Tomcat
F/A-18E/F Super Hornet
FUBAR (TV series)
F 35
Facebook
Fandango Media
Fandom, Inc.
Far from Heaven
Far from the Madding Crowd (1967 film)
Farewell, My Lovely (1975 film)
Fargo (1996 film)
Fast & Furious 6
Featurette
Fede Álvarez
Field of Dreams
Fifth-generation fighter
Finding Neverland (film)
First-dollar gross
Flag of Japan
Flag of the Republic of China
Flag rank
Flags of Our Fathers (film)
Flashdance
Flight deck
Flight instructor
Flight jacket
Flyboys (film)
Ford v Ferrari
Formula One
Forrest Gump
Foundation (TV series)
Frost/Nixon (film)
Frozen (2013 film)
Full frame (cinematography)
Furious 7
G-Force (film)
G-force
G.I. Joe: Retaliation
G.I. Joe (film series)
GE Aviation
GQ
Gandhi (film)
Gemini Man (film)
Geostorm
Ghost in the Shell (2017 film)
Ghosted (2023 film)
Gimbal
Giorgio Moroder
Gizmodo
Glen Powell
Glory Road (film)
God's Own Country (2017 film)
Gods and Monsters (film)
Golden Globe Awards
Gone in 60 Seconds (2000 film)
Good Night, and Good Luck
Good Rivals
Grace and Frankie
Gran Torino
Grease (film)
Great Balls of Fire
Green Book (film)
Greg Tarzan Davis
Grumman F-14 Tomcat
Hacksaw Ridge
Hans Zimmer
Happy-Go-Lucky (2008 film)
Harold Faltermeyer
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (film)
Hasbro
Heart of Stone (2023 film)
Heaven in Your Eyes
Henry V (1944 film)
Her (film)
Hidden Figures
Hold My Hand (Lady Gaga song)
Home Alone
Hotel Rwanda
How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000 film)
Howards End (film)
HuffPost
Hugo (film)
Hypersonic speed
IMAX
IMDb
IMDb (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
I Ain't Worried
I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
If Beale Street Could Talk (film)
Il Postino: The Postman
Impostor (2001 film)
In America (film)
In Which We Serve
In the Bedroom
Inception
Independence Day (1996 film)
India Today
IndieWire
Inglourious Basterds
Interscope Records
Investor's Business Daily
Invictus (film)
Iran
Iron Man 2
Iron Man 3
It Happened One Night
JFK (film)
Jack Epps Jr.
Jack Reacher
Jack Reacher: Never Go Back
Jack Reacher (film)
Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit
Jack Ryan (TV series)
Jack Ryan (franchise)
Jack the Giant Slayer
Jacobin (magazine)
Jake Picking
James Corden
James Handy
Japan Academy Film Prize
Japan Academy Film Prize for Outstanding Foreign Language Film
Jay Ellis
Jean Louisa Kelly
Jennifer Connelly
Jerry Bruckheimer
Jim Cash
Jim Gianopulos
John Lasseter
Joint Strike Fighter program
Joker (2019 film)
Jon Hamm
Jon Weinbach
Joseph Kosinski
Julius Caesar (1953 film)
Juno (film)
Jurassic Park (film)
Jurassic World Dominion
Justin Marks (writer)
KEYW
Kangaroo Jack
Kansas City Chiefs
Kelly McGillis
Kenneth R. Whitesell
Kenny Loggins
Kill Bill: Volume 1
Kill Bill: Volume 2
Killers in the House
Killers of the Flower Moon (film)
King Arthur (2004 film)
Kramer vs. Kramer
L.A. Confidential (film)
La La Land
Labor Day
Lady Gaga
Lake Tahoe
Lantana (film)
Laser-guided bomb
Laser designator
Legend (1985 film)
Lemoore, California
Les Misérables (2012 film)
Lestat de Lioncourt
Letters from Iwo Jima
Lewis Hamilton
Lewis Pullman
Licorice Pizza
Lieutenant (junior grade)
Lieutenant (navy)
Life (2017 film)
List of 1977 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1978 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1979 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1980 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1981 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1982 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1983 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1984 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1985 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1986 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1987 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1988 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1989 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1990 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1991 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1992 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1993 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1994 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1995 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1996 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1997 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1998 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 1999 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2000 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2001 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2002 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2003 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2004 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2005 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2006 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2007 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2008 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2009 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2010 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2011 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2012 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2013 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2014 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2015 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2016 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2017 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2018 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2019 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2020 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2021 box office number-one films in the United States
List of 2022 box office number-one films in the United States
List of Star Trek films
List of Top Gun video games
List of accolades received by Top Gun: Maverick
List of awards and nominations received by Tom Cruise
List of film sequels by box-office performance
List of highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada
List of highest-grossing films in the United States by year
List of media set in San Diego
Lockheed Martin
Lockheed Martin SR-72
Lola VFX
London
Lone Survivor
Lookbook
Lorne Balfe
Los Angeles
Los Angeles Times
Lost Girls (film)
Lost in Translation (film)
Loving (2016 film)
Luck (2022 film)
Lyliana Wray
Macbeth (1971 film)
Mach number
Mad Max: Fury Road
Manchester by the Sea (film)
Manhattan (1979 film)
Manhattan (TV series)
Manny Jacinto
March or Die (film)
Marine Corps Air Station Miramar
Marty (film)
Maryland
Matchbox (brand)
Meg Ryan
Memento (film)
Memorial Day
Metacritic
Method Studios
Mexico City
Microsoft Flight Simulator (2020 video game)
Mighty Wings
Mil Mi-24
Miles Teller
Military–entertainment complex
Million Dollar Baby
Mission: Impossible (film)
Mission: Impossible (film series)
Mission: Impossible 2
Mission: Impossible III
Mission: Impossible – Dead Reckoning Part One
Mission: Impossible – Fallout
Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol
Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation
Mississippi Burning
Monica Barbaro
Monsieur Verdoux
Monster's Ball
Moulin Rouge!
Moving Picture Company
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mulan (2020 film)
My Big Fat Greek Wedding
Mystic River (film)
NAVAIR
NBC News
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review
National Board of Review Award for Best Film
National Board of Review Awards
National Treasure: Book of Secrets
National Treasure (film)
Naval Air Station Fallon
Naval Air Station North Island
Naval Air Station Patuxent River
Naval Air Station Whidbey Island
Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake
Naval Aviation Warfighting Development Center
Naval aviation
Naval flight officer
Navy Personnel Command
Nevada
New Republic Pictures
New World Disorder (film)
New York (magazine)
Nicholas Hoult
Night Must Fall (1937 film)
Nine (2009 live-action film)
No Country for Old Men
No Time to Die
Nomadland
None but the Lonely Heart (film)
Norfolk, Virginia
North American P-51 Mustang
Nurse Betty
Oak Harbor, Washington
Oblivion (2013 film)
Odeon Luxe Leicester Square
On the Waterfront
Once Upon a Time in America
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
OneRepublic
Only the Brave (2017 film)
Ophelia (2018 film)
Ordinary People
Paisan
Paramount+
Paramount Global
Paramount Music
Paramount Pictures
Parasite (2019 film)
Paris
Patton (film)
Pearl Harbor (film)
People's Choice Awards
People (magazine)
Persons Unknown (TV series)
Pete "Maverick" Mitchell
Peter Bradshaw
Peter Craig
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides
Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl
Pitch (filmmaking)
Platoon (film)
Playing with the Boys
Polygon (website)
Pookoo
Porsche
PostTrak
Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time (film)
Principal photography
Propaganda
Public Access (film)
Pulp Fiction
Quentin Tarantino
Question 7
Quills (film)
Raiders of the Lost Ark
Rain Man
Ray (film)
Ray Gunn
Raymond Lee (actor)
Reacher (TV series)
Rear admiral (United States)
Reds (film)
Reindeer Games
Remember the Titans
Return of the Jedi
Revell
Review aggregator
Richard Brody
Ridley Scott
Rings (2005 film)
Road to Perdition
Rocky
RogerEbert.com
Rogue One
Role-playing game
Rolling Stone
Romex
Rotten Tomatoes
Royal Film Performance
Salt (2010 film)
San Diego
San Diego Air & Space Museum
San Diego Civic Theatre
San Diego Comic Con
Sanctions against Iran
Satellite Award for Best Film
Saturn Award for Best Action or Adventure Film
Saving Private Ryan
Schindler's List
Scott Pilgrim vs. the World
Scramjet
Scream 3
ScreenX
Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a Motion Picture
Seattle
Secret Headquarters
Sense and Sensibility (film)
Shakespeare in Love
Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings
Shine (film)
Showtime (TV network)
Shrek 2
Sideways
Silver Linings Playbook
Sin City (film)
Skunk Works
Sky Group
Skydance
Skydance Animation
Skydance Media
Skyfall
Skywalker Sound
Slumdog Millionaire
Snake Eyes (2021 film)
Snapchat
Sonny Bunch
Sons and Lovers (film)
Speech synthesis
Spellbound (2024 film)
Spider-Man: No Way Home
Spider-Man (2002 film)
Spider-Man 3
Spiderhead
Spoofing attack
Spotlight (film)
Spy Kids: Armageddon
Star Trek (film)
Star Trek Beyond
Star Trek Into Darkness
Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith
Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace
Star Wars: The Force Awakens
Star Wars: The Last Jedi
Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker
Star Wars (film)
Steven Spielberg
Su-57
Sukhoi Su-57
Sully (film)
Sunset
Sunset Boulevard (film)
Super Bowl LVI
Surface-to-air missile
T-shirt
TC Productions
Take My Breath Away
Teaser trailer
Ten Days in the Valley
Tencent
Tencent Pictures
Tenet (film)
Terminator: Dark Fate
Terminator: The Anime Series
Terminator (franchise)
Terminator 2: Judgment Day
Terminator Genisys
Terms of Endearment
Test pilot
TheWrap
The Adam Project
The Avengers (2012 film)
The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel
The Big Door Prize
The Bourne Ultimatum (film)
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Brothers Grimm (film)
The Checkup with Dr. David Agus
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Color Purple (1985 film)
The Conversation
The Dark Knight
The Deer Hunter
The Departed
The Descendants
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story
The Empire Strikes Back
The Family Plan
The Film and Television Charity
The Forty-Year-Old Version
The Gorge (film)
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Greatest Beer Run Ever
The Greatest Showman
The Green Mile (film)
The Guardian
The Guilt Trip (film)
The Hollywood Reporter
The Hours (film)
The Hunger Games: Catching Fire
The Hunger Games (film)
The Hurt Locker
The Independent
The Informer (1935 film)
The Insider (film)
The Intouchables
The Irishman
The King's Speech
The Last Emperor
The Last King of Scotland (film)
The Last Samurai
The Late Late Show with James Corden
The Lone Ranger (2013 film)
The Longest Day (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lord of the Rings (film series)
The Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare
The Mummy (2017 film)
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Numbers (website)
The Nun's Story (film)
The Old Guard (2020 film)
The Old Guard (franchise)
The Old Guard 2
The Old Man and the Sea (1958 film)
The Ox-Bow Incident
The Pianist (2002 film)
The Post (film)
The Quiet Man
The Ring (2002 film)
The Ring Two
The Rock (film)
The Savages (film)
The Shawshank Redemption
The Shoes of the Fisherman (film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Sixth Sense
The Skeleton Key
The Social Network
The Sorcerer's Apprentice (2010 film)
The Sting
The Theory of Everything (2014 film)
The Thin Red Line (1998 film)
The Tin Drum (film)
The Tomorrow War
The Tourist (2010 film)
The True Glory
The Turning Point (1977 film)
The United States vs. Billie Holiday
The Usual Suspects
The Vampire Chronicles
The Verge
The Walking Dead: Saints & Sinners
The Walking Dead: Saints & Sinners – Chapter 2: Retribution
The Walking Dead (franchise)
The Wall Street Journal
The Washington Post
The Way of the Gun
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (film)
Thief (film)
Thief of Hearts
Thomasin McKenzie
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri
Three Men and a Baby
Tick, Tick... Boom! (film)
Titanic (1997 film)
Tokyo
Tom Cruise
Tom Cruise: All the World's a Stage
Tom Cruise: An Unauthorized Biography
Tom Cruise: Unauthorized
Tom Cruise Purple
Tom Cruise filmography
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tomahawk (missile)
Tony Scott
Top Gun
Top Gun: Combat Zones
Top Gun: Danger Zone
Top Gun: Fire at Will
Top Gun: Guts and Glory
Top Gun: Hornet's Nest
Top Gun: Maverick (soundtrack)
Top Gun: The Second Mission
Top Gun (1986 video game)
Top Gun (1987 video game)
Top Gun (2010 video game)
Top Gun (franchise)
Top Gun (soundtrack)
Top Gun 2
Top Gun 2 (video game)
Top Gun Anthem
Topaze (1933 American film)
Toy Story
Toy Story 3
Traffic (2000 film)
Trailer (promotion)
Transformers
Transformers: Age of Extinction
Transformers: Dark of the Moon
Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen
Transformers: Rise of the Beasts
Tron: Legacy
True Grit (2010 film)
Twickenham Film Studios
USA Today
USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72)
USS Theodore Roosevelt (CVN-71)
Ultra HD Blu-ray
Unbroken (film)
United States Air Force
United States Department of Defense
United States Navy
United States Navy Strike Fighter Tactics Instructor program
Unmanned aerial vehicle
Untitled Captain America–Black Panther video game
Untitled Joseph Kosinski film
Untitled eighth Mission: Impossible film
Untitled fourth Bad Boys film
Up in the Air (2009 film)
VFX
Val Kilmer
Valkyrie (film)
Vanilla Sky
Vanity Fair (magazine)
Variety (magazine)
Veronica Guerin (film)
Vice admiral (United States)
Vudu
WAVY-TV
Walk the Line
Walmart
Washington (state)
Wayback Machine
Weapon systems officer
Weighted average
West Side Story (2021 film)
Wind tunnel
Without Limits
Without Remorse (film)
WondLa
Wonder Woman (2017 film)
Wonder Woman 1984
World Health Organization
World War Z (film)
Writers Guild of America, East
Yahoo!
YouTube
Young Doctors in Love
Young Woman and the Sea
Zack Stentz
Zero Dark Thirty
https://variety.com/2018/film/news/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-photo-1202826439/
https://web.archive.org/web/20121014203715/http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/cotown/la-et-ct-tony-scott-top-gun-20120820,0,122843.story
https://variety.com/2015/film/news/top-gun-2-maverick-drone-warfare-1201529697/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150627112235/http://variety.com/2015/film/news/top-gun-2-maverick-drone-warfare-1201529697/
http://creativescreenwriting.com/king-of-the-swingers-justin-marks-on-the-jungle-book/
https://web.archive.org/web/20160422050825/http://creativescreenwriting.com/king-of-the-swingers-justin-marks-on-the-jungle-book/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180313125045/http://collider.com/ashley-miller-zack-stentz-top-gun-2/
https://www.investors.com/news/boeing-super-hornet-top-gun-sequel-tom-cruise-lockheed-f35/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180601230655/https://www.investors.com/news/boeing-super-hornet-top-gun-sequel-tom-cruise-lockheed-f35/
https://movies.yahoo.com/blogs/movie-talk/top-gun-producer-jerry-bruckheimer-reveals-won-over-233712961.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20131022174814/http://movies.yahoo.com/blogs/movie-talk/top-gun-producer-jerry-bruckheimer-reveals-won-over-233712961.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20170701012824/http://deadline.com/2017/06/top-gun-sequel-release-july-12-2019-tom-cruiise-joseph-kosinski-jerry-bruckheimer-paramount-1202123050/
https://variety.com/2017/film/news/paramount-tom-cruise-top-gun-sequel-2019-1202485244/
https://web.archive.org/web/20170701134348/http://variety.com/2017/film/news/paramount-tom-cruise-top-gun-sequel-2019-1202485244/
https://www.thewrap.com/val-kilmer-iceman-top-gun-maverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180606205502/https://www.thewrap.com/val-kilmer-iceman-top-gun-maverick/
https://variety.com/2018/film/news/top-gun-maverick-miles-teller-1202861366/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180704213810/https://variety.com/2018/film/news/top-gun-maverick-miles-teller-1202861366/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/top-gun-2-jennifer-connelly-talks-join-tom-cruise-sequel-1128851
https://web.archive.org/web/20180721000719/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/top-gun-2-jennifer-connelly-talks-join-tom-cruise-sequel-1128851
https://deadline.com/2018/07/jennifer-connelly-top-gun-2-maverick-tom-cruise-1202430491/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180720231630/https://deadline.com/2018/07/jennifer-connelly-top-gun-2-maverick-tom-cruise-1202430491/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/glen-powell-join-tom-cruise-top-gun-sequel-1131037
https://web.archive.org/web/20180801215721/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/glen-powell-join-tom-cruise-top-gun-sequel-1131037
https://variety.com/2018/film/news/monica-barbaro-top-gun-maverick-miles-teller-1202913131/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190325171047/https://variety.com/2018/film/news/monica-barbaro-top-gun-maverick-miles-teller-1202913131/
https://deadline.com/2018/08/top-gun-2-tom-cruise-thomasin-mckenzie-charles-parnell-jay-ellis-bashiresalahuddin-danny-ramirez-monica-barbaro-1202449761/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180823225227/https://deadline.com/2018/08/top-gun-2-tom-cruise-thomasin-mckenzie-charles-parnell-jay-ellis-bashiresalahuddin-danny-ramirez-monica-barbaro-1202449761/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/top-gun-maverick-casts-jon-hamm-ed-harris-1136875
https://web.archive.org/web/20180823053539/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/top-gun-maverick-casts-jon-hamm-ed-harris-1136875
https://deadline.com/2018/09/top-gun-maverick-manny-jacinto-joins-cast-nbc-the-good-place-1202472606/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180928121052/https://deadline.com/2018/09/top-gun-maverick-manny-jacinto-joins-cast-nbc-the-good-place-1202472606/
https://deadline.com/2018/10/top-gun-maverick-wraps-up-casting-kara-wang-raymond-lee-jack-schumacher-1202475480/
https://web.archive.org/web/20181003235123/https://deadline.com/2018/10/top-gun-maverick-wraps-up-casting-kara-wang-raymond-lee-jack-schumacher-1202475480/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/netflixs-lost-girls-adds-thomasin-mckenzie-lola-kirke-dean-winters-1155441
https://web.archive.org/web/20181030153947/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/netflixs-lost-girls-adds-thomasin-mckenzie-lola-kirke-dean-winters-1155441
https://deadline.com/2018/11/bree-condon-kimberly-guilfoyle-jay-roach-fox-news-film-chelsea-harris-top-gun-maverick-1202510440/
https://web.archive.org/web/20181129100222/https://deadline.com/2018/11/bree-condon-kimberly-guilfoyle-jay-roach-fox-news-film-chelsea-harris-top-gun-maverick-1202510440/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180531182602/https://variety.com/2018/film/news/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-photo-1202826439/
https://www.10news.com/entertainment/top-gun-2-tom-cruise-shares-photo-on-first-day-of-production-on-top-gun-sequel
https://web.archive.org/web/20180920234425/https://www.10news.com/entertainment/top-gun-2-tom-cruise-shares-photo-on-first-day-of-production-on-top-gun-sequel
https://www.navaltoday.com/2018/08/23/top-gun-sequel-begins-filming-aboard-uss-abraham-lincoln/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190616184100/https://navaltoday.com/2018/08/23/top-gun-sequel-begins-filming-aboard-uss-abraham-lincoln/
https://www.wavy.com/news/military/navy/filming-for-top-gun-sequel-taking-place-aboard-uss-abraham-lincoln/1385610159
https://web.archive.org/web/20190406042743/https://www.wavy.com/news/military/navy/filming-for-top-gun-sequel-taking-place-aboard-uss-abraham-lincoln/1385610159
https://www.nbcsandiego.com/news/local/tom-cruise-top-gun-sequel-uss-theodore-roosevelt-reported-tensions-505966161.html?amp=y
https://www.insider.com/miles-teller-justin-biebers-ufc-challenge-tom-cruise-2019-6
http://www.news-ridgecrest.com/news/story.pl?id=0000009064
https://carsonnow.org/story/12/10/2018/tom-cruise-allegedly-tahoe-two-weeks-filming-top-gun-2-maverick
https://web.archive.org/web/20190719141354/https://carsonnow.org/story/12/10/2018/tom-cruise-allegedly-tahoe-two-weeks-filming-top-gun-2-maverick
https://keyw.com/top-gun-2-set-to-be-filmed-in-washington-state-this-summer/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190719142301/https://keyw.com/top-gun-2-set-to-be-filmed-in-washington-state-this-summer/
https://www.polygon.com/2019/7/18/20698923/tom-cruise-top-gun-2-trailer-sdcc-2019
https://web.archive.org/web/20190718193949/https://www.polygon.com/2019/7/18/20698923/tom-cruise-top-gun-2-trailer-sdcc-2019
https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-49042774
https://web.archive.org/web/20190719123044/https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-49042774
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/top-gun-maverick-trailer-reactions-star-wars-similarities-a9011806.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20190720145231/https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/top-gun-maverick-trailer-reactions-star-wars-similarities-a9011806.html
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt1745960/
https://deadline.com/2018/08/top-gun-2-a-quiet-place-2-new-release-date-1202446275/
https://web.archive.org/web/20180829234505/https://deadline.com/2018/08/top-gun-2-a-quiet-place-2-new-release-date-1202446275/
https://deadline.com/2021/09/top-gun-maverick-flies-from-thanksgiving-to-memorial-day-weekend-mission-impossible-7-ignites-in-fall-2022-1234825624/
https://variety.com/2020/film/box-office/a-quiet-place-2-top-gun-maverick-release-date-delay-1234709716/
https://deadline.com/2021/04/top-gun-maverick-mission-impossible-7-tom-cruise-release-date-change-july-4th-weekend-memorial-day-weekend-1234730581/
https://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/cotown/la-et-ct-tony-scott-top-gun-20120820,0,122843.story
https://collider.com/ashley-miller-zack-stentz-top-gun-2/
https://deadline.com/2017/06/top-gun-sequel-release-july-12-2019-tom-cruiise-joseph-kosinski-jerry-bruckheimer-paramount-1202123050/
https://people.com/movies/tom-cruise-was-adamant-val-kilmer-had-to-return-top-gun-maverick/
https://www.etonline.com/kelly-mcgillis-says-she-wasnt-asked-to-be-part-of-top-gun-sequel-exclusive-129341
https://ymcinema.com/2019/12/19/top-gun-maverick-six-sony-venice-cameras-inside-a-fighter-jet-cockpit/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/top-gun-maverick-trailer-sparks-controversy-tom-cruise-jacket-1225993
https://theaviationist.com/2020/02/24/new-matchbox-top-gun-maverick-themed-line-reveals-shape-of-movies-mysterious-hypersonic-aircraft/amp/
https://www.revell.de/
https://www.superherohype.com/geek-culture/483595-tom-cruise-as-maverick-becomes-a-top-gun-transformers-toy
https://deadline.com/2021/08/top-gun-maverick-first-13-minutes-previewed-along-with-new-trailer-at-cinemacon-1234822515/
https://www.variety.com/2020/film/news/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-release-date-1203521021/
https://theindependent.in/top-gun-maverick-release-date-announced/
https://deadline.com/2020/04/top-gun-maverick-flies-to-christmas-corridor-spongebob-eyes-late-summer-quiet-place-ii-to-debut-labor-day-1202898738/
https://www.wsj.com/articles/want-to-be-a-hollywood-player-covid-and-streaming-have-changed-all-the-rules-11611247554?/
https://comicbook.com/movies/amp/news/top-gun-maverick-trailer-released-during-super-bowl-2022/
https://www.thewrap.com/top-gun-maverick-flies-to-cannes-after-2-year-pandemic-delay/
https://deadline.com/2022/03/tom-cruise-cannes-film-festival-career-retrospective-may-18-top-gun-maverick-premiere-1234980786/
https://deadline.com/2016/01/top-gun-2-sequel-tom-cruise-jerry-bruckheimer-meeting-1201691848/
https://deadline.com/2022/04/top-gun-marverick-brian-robbins-jerry-bruckheimer-cinemacon-1235012365/
https://deadline.com/video/top-gun-maverick-review-tom-cruise-sequel/
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/top-gun-maverick
https://editorial.rottentomatoes.com/article/top-gun-maverick-first-reviews-the-most-thrilling-blockbuster-weve-gotten-in-years/
https://nymag.com/daily/entertainment/2010/10/top_gun_2.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20101015190520/http://nymag.com/daily/entertainment/2010/10/top_gun_2.html
https://variety.com/2017/film/news/top-gun-2-sequel-title-top-gun-maverick-1202452275/
https://collider.com/top-gun-2-title-tom-cruise/
https://www.denofgeek.com/movies/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-joseph-kosinski-interview/
https://www.businessinsider.com/director-tony-scott-spent-his-final-days-researching-top-gun-2-with-tom-cruise-2012-8
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/tony-scott-dead-tom-cruise-top-gun-2-364131/
https://deadline.com/2022/05/joseph-kosinski-top-gun-maverick-spiderhead-1235019122/
https://www.dnaindia.com/hollywood/report-top-gun-maverick-is-american-hustle-scribe-eric-warren-singer-rewriting-script-for-tom-cruise-starrer-2541914
https://www.indiatoday.in/pti-feed/story/eric-warren-singer-boards-top-gun-2-as-scribe-1034800-2017-08-31
https://collider.com/christopher-mcquarrie-top-gun-2/
https://www.military.com/off-duty/movies/2022/04/18/tom-cruise-personally-designed-flight-training-new-top-gun-actors.html
https://collider.com/top-gun-maverick-release-date-delay-explained/
https://variety.com/2022/film/news/top-gun-maverick-shot-800-hours-footage-1235231986/
https://collider.com/new-top-gun-2-footage-tom-cruise-football-game-maverick/
https://cogconnected.com/2022/05/ace-combat-7-collabs-top-gun-maverick/
https://www.pcgamer.com/ace-combat-scores-the-dream-collaboration-with-top-gun/
https://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2019/12/16/top-gun-maverick-trailer-with-tom-cruise-stays-in-the-nostalgic-comfort-zone/
https://www.marketingdive.com/news/top-gun-pilots-snapchats-new-trailer-reaction-lens/569215/
https://www.thedigitalfix.com/top-gun/2-website-will-give-you-your-own-call-sign
https://deadline.com/2022/05/top-gun-maverick-premiere-livestream-youtube-bridgerton-pat-mcgrath-1235014102/
https://www.thewrap.com/how-to-watch-top-gun-maverick-red-carpet-premiere-online-livestream/
http://www.nevadaappeal.com/news/2022/may/11/david-c-henley-coming-soon-theaers-top-gun-maveric/
https://www.goldderby.com/article/2022/cannes-film-festival-top-gun-maverick/
https://www.cbr.com/top-gun-maverick-screenx-early-showings-poster-paramount/
http://www.amctheatres.com/movies/top-gun-maverick-early-access-event-69437
https://www.benzinga.com/general/entertainment/22/05/27408723/benzinga-asks-will-moviegoers-flock-to-theaters-to-see-tom-cruise-in-top-gun-maverick
https://news.sky.com/story/amp/top-gun-maverick-premiere-prince-william-and-duchess-of-cambridge-step-out-with-tom-cruise-for-films-glamorous-leicester-square-debut-12616909
https://www.rollingstone.com/tv/tv-news/tom-cruise-james-corden-top-gun-late-late-show-1357593/
https://www.foxnews.com/entertainment/tom-cruise-james-corden-fly-top-gun-maverick
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/20/business/media/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick.html
https://www.eventcinemas.com.au/Promotions/TopGunMaverickCombo
https://www.thrillist.com/news/nation/applebees-offers-top-gun-maverick-tickets
https://www.watchvudu.com/topgunmaverick/
https://deadline.com/2022/05/top-gun-maverick-box-office-1235034420/
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/26/movies/top-gun-maverick-review.html
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2022/may/12/top-gun-maverick-review-tom-cruise-is-still-needy-less-speedy-in-a-rocknroll-sequel
https://entertainment.ie/movies/movie-reviews/top-gun-maverick-410633/
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/reviews/top-gun-maverick-release-date-review-cast-b2084190.html
https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front-row/top-gun-maverick-reviewed-tom-cruise-takes-empty-thrills-to-new-heights
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/top-gun-maverick-movie-review-2022
https://www.cnn.com/2022/05/12/entertainment/top-gun-kelly-mcgillis-meg-ryan/index.html
https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/4550166
https://www.wsj.com/amp/articles/top-gun-maverick-loses-chinese-investor-due-to-pro-u-s-messaging-11653643803
https://www.theverge.com/2022/5/26/23142595/microsoft-flight-simulator-top-gun-expansion-launch-free
https://deadline.com/2022/05/top-gun-maverick-darkstar-plane-sr-72-1235034851/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-features/top-gun-maverick-jerry-bruckheimer-talks-tom-cruise-sequel-1235149929/
https://www.slashfilm.com/865155/top-gun-maverick-writers-christopher-mcquarrie-and-justin-marks-on-flying-in-the-jets-and-bringing-iceman-back-interview/
https://www.slashfilm.com/875138/jon-hamm-didnt-need-to-see-a-script-to-know-he-wanted-a-role-in-top-gun-maverick/
https://www.businessinsider.in/tom-cruise-reveals-the-title-for-the-top-gun-sequel/articleshow/58978397.cms
https://www.thewrap.com/val-kilmer-claims-to-have-landed-role-in-top-gun-2-in-rambling-facebook-post/
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-training-b2060580.html
https://www.indiewire.com/2012/03/the-town-writer-peter-craig-to-pen-top-gun-2-253595/
https://collider.com/top-gun-2-justin-marks/
https://www.huffpost.com/entry/top-gun-2-jerry-bruckheimer_n_5051843
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/top-gun-2-lands-jungle-731131/
https://www.comingsoon.net/movies/news/1120515-meet-the-recruits-of-top-gun-maverick-in-six-new-photos#/slide/1
https://findawriter.wgaeast.org/project/1152598/top-gun-maverick/
https://deadline.com/2022/05/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-opening-records-global-international-box-office-1235034560/
https://deadline.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-500-million-second-weekend-jurassic-world-dominion-doctor-strange-global-international-boxofficeinternational-box-office-1235038582/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-features/top-gun-maverick-monica-barbaro-female-aviator-inspiration-1235158388/
https://www.praguemorning.cz/top-gun-maverick-starts-in-theatres-it-was-filmed-on-czech-l-39-albatros-aircraft/
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-26/tom-cruise-s-fighter-jet-rides-paid-us-navy-up-to-11-374-hourly
https://www.thewrap.com/top-gun-maverick-film-review-tom-cruise-2022-sequel/
https://deadline.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-box-office-tom-cruise-record-1235038177/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0yBi1S0zFkQ
https://gizmodo.com/tom-cruise-top-gun-sequel-playboy-opinion-1986-propagan-1848858326
https://www.nme.com/news/music/onerepublic-share-new-single-i-aint-worried-from-top-gun-maverick-soundtrack-3225445
https://www.billboard.com/music/music-news/onerepublic-i-aint-worried-top-gun-maverick-video-1235070691/
https://www.actionnewsnow.com/news/chicos-top-secret-mission-in-the-filming-of-top-gun-maverick/article_1a7ea352-ed72-11ec-81ae-0b8aa75679e1.html
https://www.newsday.com/amp/entertainment/movies/top-gun-maverick-trailer-tom-cruise-1.39574837
https://web.archive.org/web/20191217035643/https://www.newsday.com/amp/entertainment/movies/top-gun-maverick-trailer-tom-cruise-1.39574837
https://theaviationgeekclub.com/from-the-f-a-18-super-hornet-to-the-f-14-tomcat-all-the-fighter-aircraft-featured-in-top-gun-maverick/
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/25/tony-scott-top-gun-sequel
https://deadline.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-800-million-tom-cruise-biggest-movie-ever-1235047744/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q31202708#P345
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/business/business-news/paramount-hit-with-top-gun-copyright-lawsuit-from-original-article-authors-heirs-1235159719/
https://variety.com/2022/film/news/top-gun-copyright-lawsuit-ehud-yonay-1235285752/
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-news/top-gun-maverick-copyright-lawsuit-1363783/
https://www.reuters.com/business/media-telecom/paramount-is-sued-over-top-gun-maverick-2022-06-06/
https://www.wlwt.com/article/cincinnati-ge-aviation-noise-sounds-top-gun-maverick/40315691
https://variety.com/2022/artisans/news/f-14-planes-top-gun-maverick-production-design-1235279218/
https://people.com/movies/val-kilmer-gets-his-voice-back-after-throat-cancer-battle-using-ai-technology-hear-the-results/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220512215327/https://editorial.rottentomatoes.com/article/top-gun-maverick-first-reviews-the-most-thrilling-blockbuster-weve-gotten-in-years/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220502100936/https://gizmodo.com/tom-cruise-top-gun-sequel-playboy-opinion-1986-propagan-1848858326
https://web.archive.org/web/20151023045234/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/25/tony-scott-top-gun-sequel
https://web.archive.org/web/20170603191907/http://www.businessinsider.in/Tom-Cruise-reveals-the-title-for-the-Top-Gun-sequel/articleshow/58978397.cms
https://web.archive.org/web/20170602205918/https://variety.com/2017/film/news/top-gun-2-sequel-title-top-gun-maverick-1202452275/
https://web.archive.org/web/20170602205659/https://collider.com/top-gun-2-title-tom-cruise/
https://deadline.com/2019/06/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-first-footage-paramount-cineeurope-1202634675/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190619142650/https://deadline.com/2019/06/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-first-footage-paramount-cineeurope-1202634675/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200920182514/https://www.indiewire.com/2012/03/the-town-writer-peter-craig-to-pen-top-gun-2-253595/
https://web.archive.org/web/20140913070705/https://collider.com/top-gun-2-justin-marks/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210509215604/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/top-gun-2-lands-jungle-731131/
https://web.archive.org/web/20120822084931/https://www.businessinsider.com/director-tony-scott-spent-his-final-days-researching-top-gun-2-with-tom-cruise-2012-8
https://web.archive.org/web/20210508221427/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/tony-scott-dead-tom-cruise-top-gun-2-364131/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220518151058/https://deadline.com/2022/05/joseph-kosinski-top-gun-maverick-spiderhead-1235019122/
https://web.archive.org/web/20170901200745/https://www.dnaindia.com/hollywood/report-top-gun-maverick-is-american-hustle-scribe-eric-warren-singer-rewriting-script-for-tom-cruise-starrer-2541914
https://web.archive.org/web/20220520181131/https://www.indiatoday.in/pti-feed/story/eric-warren-singer-boards-top-gun-2-as-scribe-1034800-2017-08-31
https://web.archive.org/web/20181031234947/https://collider.com/christopher-mcquarrie-top-gun-2/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220527180655/https://www.slashfilm.com/865155/top-gun-maverick-writers-christopher-mcquarrie-and-justin-marks-on-flying-in-the-jets-and-bringing-iceman-back-interview/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200320043154/https://www.comingsoon.net/movies/news/1120515-meet-the-recruits-of-top-gun-maverick-in-six-new-photos
https://web.archive.org/web/20210224194618/https://findawriter.wgaeast.org/project/1152598/top-gun-maverick/
https://www.empireonline.com/movies/news/top-gun-maverick-screened-for-ridley-scott-memory-of-tony-exclusive/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220412161345/https://www.empireonline.com/movies/news/top-gun-maverick-screened-for-ridley-scott-memory-of-tony-exclusive/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220512130201/https://deadline.com/video/top-gun-maverick-review-tom-cruise-sequel/
https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/26523/photos-show-f-14-used-in-top-gun-2-production-snared-in-carriers-crash-barricade
https://www.sandboxx.us/blog/top-gun-maverick-producer-says-darkstar-looked-so-real-china-moved-spy-satellite-to-see-it
https://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/tech/post-production-uncovered-twickenham-film-studios-on-top-gun-maverick-feature/5172438.article
https://www.flyingmag.com/that-darkstar-in-top-gun-maverick-was-it-real/
https://screenrant.com/top-gun-2-maverick-sequel-rooster-miles-teller/
https://www.etonline.com/miles-teller-says-hes-had-conversations-with-tom-cruise-about-possible-top-gun-3-exclusive-186984
https://web.archive.org/web/20220526164124/https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/26/movies/top-gun-maverick-review.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220512132206/https://www.theguardian.com/film/2022/may/12/top-gun-maverick-review-tom-cruise-is-still-needy-less-speedy-in-a-rocknroll-sequel
https://web.archive.org/web/20220512130029/https://www.thewrap.com/top-gun-maverick-film-review-tom-cruise-2022-sequel/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220521082639/https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/reviews/top-gun-maverick-release-date-review-cast-b2084190.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220512134515/https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/top-gun-maverick-movie-review-2022
https://deadline.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-crosses-1-billion-worldwide-box-office-tom-cruise-paramount-1235052186/
https://variety.com/2022/film/box-office/top-gun-maverick-highest-grossing-movie-globally-1235303535/
https://www.bbfc.co.uk/release/top-gun-maverick-q29sbgvjdglvbjpwwc00odcwote
https://web.archive.org/web/20220527105235/https://www.bbfc.co.uk/release/top-gun-maverick-q29sbgvjdglvbjpwwc00odcwote
https://variety.com/2022/film/box-office/top-gun-maverick-opening-weekend-box-office-projections-tom-cruise-1235276259/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220525141152/https://variety.com/2022/film/box-office/top-gun-maverick-opening-weekend-box-office-projections-tom-cruise-1235276259/
https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt1745960/
https://www.indiewire.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-director-joesph-kosinski-answers-questions-spoilers-1234732058/
https://variety.com/2022/film/box-office/box-office-dc-league-of-super-pets-opening-weekend-1235330080/
https://news.northeastern.edu/2022/06/07/a-i-clones-val-kilmers-voice-in-top-gun/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220805064053/https://news.northeastern.edu/2022/06/07/a-i-clones-val-kilmers-voice-in-top-gun/
https://www.goodhousekeeping.com/life/entertainment/a40246231/val-kilmer-cancer-health-in-his-own-words/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220701065148/https://www.goodhousekeeping.com/life/entertainment/a40246231/val-kilmer-cancer-health-in-his-own-words/
https://www.rollingstone.com/music/music-news/miles-teller-great-balls-of-fire-clip-top-gun-maverick-1369753/
https://deadline.com/2022/08/box-office-bullet-train-1235085890/
https://collider.com/top-gun-maverick-671-million-global-box-office/
https://militarywatchmagazine.com/article/persian-tomcats-how-iran-keeps-its-1970s-f-14-fleet-viable-and-competitive-through-domestic-modernisation
https://variety.com/2022/music/news/kenny-loggins-top-gun-maverick-danger-zone-1235281681/
https://variety.com/2022/film/markets-festivals/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-streaming-cannes-1235270759/
https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-news/how-to-watch-top-gun-online-free-maverick-1358555/
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q31202708#P444
https://variety.com/2022/film/news/top-gun-maverick-box-office-milestone-ninth-highest-grossing-movie-ever-1235321883/
https://collider.com/top-gun-maverick-digital-blu-ray-dvd-release-dates-bonus-content/
https://postperspective.com/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-director-joe-kosinski-talks-post-and-workflow/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220823025425/https://www.usatoday.com/story/entertainment/movies/2022/08/22/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-bedroom-scene-val-kilmer-voice/7838688001/
https://www.usatoday.com/story/entertainment/movies/2022/08/22/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-bedroom-scene-val-kilmer-voice/7838688001/
https://www.billboard.com/culture/product-recommendations/top-gun-maverick-how-to-order-digital-blu-ray-dvd-1235128261/amp/
https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/aw/d/B09ZYTD8PR/ref=tmm_fbs_blu_title_0?ie=UTF8&amp&qid=&amp&sr=
https://variety.com/2022/film/features/movie-star-salaries-joaquin-phoenix-joker-2-tom-cruise-1235320046/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220720160107/https://variety.com/2022/film/features/movie-star-salaries-joaquin-phoenix-joker-2-tom-cruise-1235320046/
https://archive.today/20220527215918/https://www.wsj.com/amp/articles/top-gun-maverick-loses-chinese-investor-due-to-pro-u-s-messaging-11653643803
https://www.fighterpilotpodcast.com/episodes/145-the-making-of-top-gun-maverick/
https://www.aljazeera.com/opinions/2022/6/17/is-top-gun-still-fit-for-the-big-screen-in-the-21st-century
https://www.nbcnews.com/think/opinion/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruises-new-hollywood-war-propaganda-movie-war-rcna30773
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_QWubHLOaUo
https://skiesmag.com/features/top-gun-maverick-will-live-in-aviation-motion-picture-history-kevin-larosa-shares-how-it-was-done/
https://www.gq.com/story/gq-hype-glen-powell
https://screenrant.com/top-gun-2-maverick-goose-son-original-movie-actor-recast-reason/
https://cnalifestyle.channelnewsasia.com/entertainment/lewis-hamilton-movie-role-tom-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-325561
https://web.archive.org/web/20210901181806/https://deadline.com/2021/09/top-gun-maverick-flies-from-thanksgiving-to-memorial-day-weekend-mission-impossible-7-ignites-in-fall-2022-1234825624/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/tom-cruises-top-gun-maverick-screens-cinemacon-1235137197/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220428190918/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/tom-cruises-top-gun-maverick-screens-cinemacon-1235137197/
https://variety.com/2022/awards/awards/national-board-of-review-winners-top-gun-maverick-1235454143/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221208193613/https://variety.com/2022/awards/awards/national-board-of-review-winners-top-gun-maverick-1235454143/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220626153428/https://variety.com/2022/film/box-office/top-gun-maverick-highest-grossing-movie-globally-1235303535/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220628082204/https://deadline.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-crosses-1-billion-worldwide-box-office-tom-cruise-paramount-1235052186/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220617160116/https://deadline.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-800-million-tom-cruise-biggest-movie-ever-1235047744/
https://jacobin.com/2022/06/us-military-hollywood-movies-top-gun-censorship
https://web.archive.org/web/20220609165135/https://jacobin.com/2022/06/us-military-hollywood-movies-top-gun-censorship
https://thedesk.net/2022/12/top-gun-maveric-stream-on-paramount-plus/
https://decider.com/2022/12/21/top-gun-maverick-streaming-what-time-paramount-plus-release/
https://deadline.com/2022/06/jurassic-world-dominion-box-office-1235042811/
https://variety.com/2022/film/news/bullet-train-top-gun-box-office-slow-1235340933/
https://deadline.com/2022/08/box-office-bullet-train-bodies-bodies-bodies-pete-davidson-1235091498/
https://deadline.com/2022/09/box-office-spider-man-no-way-home-top-gun-maverick-national-cinema-day-1235107189/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/06/01/top-gun-maverick-proves-hollywood-doesnt-need-china/
https://deadline.com/2022/12/top-gun-maverick-premiere-weekend-viewership-record-paramount-plus-1235207692/
https://www.the-numbers.com/box-office-records/worldwide/all-movies/cumulative/released-in-2022
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/golden-globes-2023-winners-list-1235294541/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230111023550/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/golden-globes-2023-winners-list-1235294541/
https://gizmodo.com/highest-grossing-film-2022-avatar-2-beats-top-gun-2-1849954716
https://jacobin.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-navy-recuitment-tom-cruise
https://thereader.com/2022/05/27/top-gun-maverick-review/
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/critics-choice-awards-winners-list-full-2023-1235300137/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230116052049/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/critics-choice-awards-winners-list-full-2023-1235300137/
https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0362-4331
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/afi-best-movies-tv-shows-2022-1235278829/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221209182059/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/general-news/afi-best-movies-tv-shows-2022-1235278829/
https://deadline.com/2022/09/ticket-to-paradise-brahmastra-top-gun-maverick-global-international-box-office-1235121627/
https://variety.com/2023/film/global/bafta-film-awards-2023-winners-1235528454/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230219220613/https://variety.com/2023/film/global/bafta-film-awards-2023-winners-1235528454/
https://variety.com/2019/film/news/celebrity-salaries-leonardo-dicaprio-margot-robbie-dwayne-johnson-will-smith-1203200508/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190501003157/https://variety.com/2019/film/news/celebrity-salaries-leonardo-dicaprio-margot-robbie-dwayne-johnson-will-smith-1203200508/
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/top_gun_maverick
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/2023-oscars-winners-list-1235349224/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230313042718/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/2023-oscars-winners-list-1235349224/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230319032303/https://www.the-numbers.com/box-office-records/worldwide/all-movies/cumulative/released-in-2022
https://web.archive.org/web/20220525054151/https://theaviationgeekclub.com/from-the-f-a-18-super-hornet-to-the-f-14-tomcat-all-the-fighter-aircraft-featured-in-top-gun-maverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220619150534/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-features/top-gun-maverick-jerry-bruckheimer-talks-tom-cruise-sequel-1235149929/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220619150540/https://www.huffpost.com/entry/top-gun-2-jerry-bruckheimer_n_5051843
https://web.archive.org/web/20220605091412/https://www.denofgeek.com/movies/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-joseph-kosinski-interview/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220613183837/https://deadline.com/2016/01/top-gun-2-sequel-tom-cruise-jerry-bruckheimer-meeting-1201691848/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220605065135/https://www.thewrap.com/val-kilmer-claims-to-have-landed-role-in-top-gun-2-in-rambling-facebook-post/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220605202032/https://people.com/movies/tom-cruise-was-adamant-val-kilmer-had-to-return-top-gun-maverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221123165239/https://www.gq.com/story/gq-hype-glen-powell
https://web.archive.org/web/20220525213610/https://www.slashfilm.com/875138/jon-hamm-didnt-need-to-see-a-script-to-know-he-wanted-a-role-in-top-gun-maverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220612170903/https://www.etonline.com/kelly-mcgillis-says-she-wasnt-asked-to-be-part-of-top-gun-sequel-exclusive-129341
https://web.archive.org/web/20220615055715/https://www.cnn.com/2022/05/12/entertainment/top-gun-kelly-mcgillis-meg-ryan/index.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20221127093216/https://screenrant.com/top-gun-2-maverick-goose-son-original-movie-actor-recast-reason/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220809090610/https://cnalifestyle.channelnewsasia.com/entertainment/lewis-hamilton-movie-role-tom-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-325561
https://web.archive.org/web/20220527014050/https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-26/tom-cruise-s-fighter-jet-rides-paid-us-navy-up-to-11-374-hourly
https://web.archive.org/web/20220520181131/https://www.military.com/off-duty/movies/2022/04/18/tom-cruise-personally-designed-flight-training-new-top-gun-actors.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220610040208/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-features/top-gun-maverick-monica-barbaro-female-aviator-inspiration-1235158388/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220616001225/https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-training-b2060580.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20221019190753/https://www.fighterpilotpodcast.com/episodes/145-the-making-of-top-gun-maverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221024215251/https://skiesmag.com/features/top-gun-maverick-will-live-in-aviation-motion-picture-history-kevin-larosa-shares-how-it-was-done/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220531044320/https://www.nevadaappeal.com/news/2022/may/11/david-c-henley-coming-soon-theaers-top-gun-maveric/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220619150535/https://www.insider.com/miles-teller-justin-biebers-ufc-challenge-tom-cruise-2019-6
https://web.archive.org/web/20220601010813/http://www.news-ridgecrest.com/news/story.pl?id=0000009064
https://web.archive.org/web/20220619150554/https://www.actionnewsnow.com/news/chicos-top-secret-mission-in-the-filming-of-top-gun-maverick/article_1a7ea352-ed72-11ec-81ae-0b8aa75679e1.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220315154401/https://www.goldderby.com/article/2022/cannes-film-festival-top-gun-maverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220520181144/https://collider.com/top-gun-maverick-release-date-delay-explained/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220531093315/https://ymcinema.com/2019/12/19/top-gun-maverick-six-sony-venice-cameras-inside-a-fighter-jet-cockpit/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220530130711/https://www.praguemorning.cz/top-gun-maverick-starts-in-theatres-it-was-filmed-on-czech-l-39-albatros-aircraft/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221024151016/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_QWubHLOaUo
https://web.archive.org/web/20220611075055/https://variety.com/2022/film/news/top-gun-maverick-shot-800-hours-footage-1235231986/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220622191002/https://variety.com/2022/artisans/news/f-14-planes-top-gun-maverick-production-design-1235279218/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220612231900/https://deadline.com/2022/05/top-gun-maverick-darkstar-plane-sr-72-1235034851/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230327092824/https://www.sandboxx.us/blog/top-gun-maverick-producer-says-darkstar-looked-so-real-china-moved-spy-satellite-to-see-it%EF%BF%BC/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220709005143/https://www.flyingmag.com/that-darkstar-in-top-gun-maverick-was-it-real/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221006043643/https://militarywatchmagazine.com/article/persian-tomcats-how-iran-keeps-its-1970s-f-14-fleet-viable-and-competitive-through-domestic-modernisation
https://web.archive.org/web/20220518165107/https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/26523/photos-show-f-14-used-in-top-gun-2-production-snared-in-carriers-crash-barricade
https://web.archive.org/web/20220613231400/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0yBi1S0zFkQ
https://web.archive.org/web/20220620212819/https://www.wlwt.com/article/cincinnati-ge-aviation-noise-sounds-top-gun-maverick/40315691
https://web.archive.org/web/20220526134056/https://postperspective.com/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-director-joe-kosinski-talks-post-and-workflow/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220711134234/https://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/tech/post-production-uncovered-twickenham-film-studios-on-top-gun-maverick-feature/5172438.article
https://web.archive.org/web/20210819225905/https://people.com/movies/val-kilmer-gets-his-voice-back-after-throat-cancer-battle-using-ai-technology-hear-the-results/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220807150328/https://www.rollingstone.com/music/music-news/miles-teller-great-balls-of-fire-clip-top-gun-maverick-1369753/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220729202539/https://www.indiewire.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-director-joesph-kosinski-answers-questions-spoilers-1234732058/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220526131324/https://www.nme.com/news/music/onerepublic-share-new-single-i-aint-worried-from-top-gun-maverick-soundtrack-3225445
https://web.archive.org/web/20220521132726/https://www.billboard.com/music/music-news/onerepublic-i-aint-worried-top-gun-maverick-video-1235070691/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221007194924/https://variety.com/2022/music/news/kenny-loggins-top-gun-maverick-danger-zone-1235281681/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200630092336/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/top-gun-maverick-trailer-sparks-controversy-tom-cruise-jacket-1225993
https://web.archive.org/web/20220526155029/https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/4550166
https://web.archive.org/web/20220520182202/https://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2019/12/16/top-gun-maverick-trailer-with-tom-cruise-stays-in-the-nostalgic-comfort-zone/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220611144235/https://www.marketingdive.com/news/top-gun-pilots-snapchats-new-trailer-reaction-lens/569215/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200505093026/https://theaviationist.com/2020/02/24/new-matchbox-top-gun-maverick-themed-line-reveals-shape-of-movies-mysterious-hypersonic-aircraft/amp/
https://web.archive.org/web/20201011123830/https://www.revell.de/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210901224802/https://www.superherohype.com/geek-culture/483595-tom-cruise-as-maverick-becomes-a-top-gun-transformers-toy
https://web.archive.org/web/20210826183852/https://deadline.com/2021/08/top-gun-maverick-first-13-minutes-previewed-along-with-new-trailer-at-cinemacon-1234822515/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220520181707/https://collider.com/new-top-gun-2-footage-tom-cruise-football-game-maverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220214023202/https://comicbook.com/movies/amp/news/top-gun-maverick-trailer-released-during-super-bowl-2022/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220611110152/https://cogconnected.com/2022/05/ace-combat-7-collabs-top-gun-maverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220611103936/https://www.pcgamer.com/ace-combat-scores-the-dream-collaboration-with-top-gun/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220612002937/https://www.theverge.com/2022/5/26/23142595/microsoft-flight-simulator-top-gun-expansion-launch-free
https://web.archive.org/web/20220516092505/https://www.thedigitalfix.com/top-gun/2-website-will-give-you-your-own-call-sign
https://web.archive.org/web/20220527135212/https://www.rollingstone.com/tv/tv-news/tom-cruise-james-corden-top-gun-late-late-show-1357593/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220526222528/https://www.foxnews.com/entertainment/tom-cruise-james-corden-fly-top-gun-maverick
https://web.archive.org/web/20220527034403/https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/20/business/media/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20220620101814/https://www.eventcinemas.com.au/Promotions/TopGunMaverickCombo
https://web.archive.org/web/20220527135212/https://www.thrillist.com/news/nation/applebees-offers-top-gun-maverick-tickets
https://web.archive.org/web/20220703043828/https://www.watchvudu.com/topgunmaverick/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200302200330/https://variety.com/2020/film/news/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-release-date-1203521021/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200718234909/https://theindependent.in/top-gun-maverick-release-date-announced/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200402204139/https://deadline.com/2020/04/top-gun-maverick-flies-to-christmas-corridor-spongebob-eyes-late-summer-quiet-place-ii-to-debut-labor-day-1202898738/
https://web.archive.org/web/20200724031928/https://variety.com/2020/film/box-office/a-quiet-place-2-top-gun-maverick-release-date-delay-1234709716/
https://web.archive.org/web/20210409173040/https://deadline.com/2021/04/top-gun-maverick-mission-impossible-7-tom-cruise-release-date-change-july-4th-weekend-memorial-day-weekend-1234730581/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220520182728/https://deadline.com/2022/05/top-gun-maverick-premiere-livestream-youtube-bridgerton-pat-mcgrath-1235014102/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220520182729/https://www.thewrap.com/how-to-watch-top-gun-maverick-red-carpet-premiere-online-livestream/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220607131208/https://www.thewrap.com/top-gun-maverick-flies-to-cannes-after-2-year-pandemic-delay/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220519095454/https://deadline.com/2022/03/tom-cruise-cannes-film-festival-career-retrospective-may-18-top-gun-maverick-premiere-1234980786/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220526042135/https://news.sky.com/story/amp/top-gun-maverick-premiere-prince-william-and-duchess-of-cambridge-step-out-with-tom-cruise-for-films-glamorous-leicester-square-debut-12616909
https://web.archive.org/web/20220525234955/https://www.cbr.com/top-gun-maverick-screenx-early-showings-poster-paramount/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220529083223/https://www.amctheatres.com/movies/top-gun-maverick-early-access-event-69437
https://web.archive.org/web/20220525230814/https://www.benzinga.com/general/entertainment/22/05/27408723/benzinga-asks-will-moviegoers-flock-to-theaters-to-see-tom-cruise-in-top-gun-maverick
https://web.archive.org/web/20210130233139/https://www.wsj.com/articles/want-to-be-a-hollywood-player-covid-and-streaming-have-changed-all-the-rules-11611247554?/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220428210800/https://deadline.com/2022/04/top-gun-marverick-brian-robbins-jerry-bruckheimer-cinemacon-1235012365/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220518152212/https://variety.com/2022/film/markets-festivals/tom-cruise-top-gun-maverick-streaming-cannes-1235270759/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220526232313/https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-news/how-to-watch-top-gun-online-free-maverick-1358555/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220906033425/https://www.billboard.com/culture/product-recommendations/top-gun-maverick-how-to-order-digital-blu-ray-dvd-1235128261/amp/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230327092808/https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B09ZYTD8PR/ref=redir_mobile_desktop/259-5795089-9561125?_encoding=UTF8&amp=&amp=&qid=&ref_=tmm_fbs_blu_title_0&sr=
https://web.archive.org/web/20220816171611/https://collider.com/top-gun-maverick-digital-blu-ray-dvd-release-dates-bonus-content/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221222090148/https://thedesk.net/2022/12/top-gun-maveric-stream-on-paramount-plus/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221221184055/https://decider.com/2022/12/21/top-gun-maverick-streaming-what-time-paramount-plus-release/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221228164730/https://deadline.com/2022/12/top-gun-maverick-premiere-weekend-viewership-record-paramount-plus-1235207692/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220605045923/https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/06/01/top-gun-maverick-proves-hollywood-doesnt-need-china/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230111113351/https://gizmodo.com/highest-grossing-film-2022-avatar-2-beats-top-gun-2-1849954716
https://web.archive.org/web/20220530084732/https://deadline.com/2022/05/top-gun-maverick-box-office-1235034420/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220612163241/https://deadline.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-box-office-tom-cruise-record-1235038177/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220611134808/https://deadline.com/2022/06/jurassic-world-dominion-box-office-1235042811/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220731153117/https://variety.com/2022/film/box-office/box-office-dc-league-of-super-pets-opening-weekend-1235330080/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220807002951/https://deadline.com/2022/08/box-office-bullet-train-1235085890/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220815013822/https://variety.com/2022/film/news/bullet-train-top-gun-box-office-slow-1235340933/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220813190142/https://deadline.com/2022/08/box-office-bullet-train-bodies-bodies-bodies-pete-davidson-1235091498/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220905165413/https://deadline.com/2022/09/box-office-spider-man-no-way-home-top-gun-maverick-national-cinema-day-1235107189/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220807214801/https://variety.com/2022/film/news/top-gun-maverick-box-office-milestone-ninth-highest-grossing-movie-ever-1235321883/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220807214801/https://collider.com/top-gun-maverick-671-million-global-box-office/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220530085043/https://deadline.com/2022/05/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-opening-records-global-international-box-office-1235034560/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220611115119/https://deadline.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruise-500-million-second-weekend-jurassic-world-dominion-doctor-strange-global-international-boxofficeinternational-box-office-1235038582/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220918183418/https://deadline.com/2022/09/ticket-to-paradise-brahmastra-top-gun-maverick-global-international-box-office-1235121627/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220527171713/https://entertainment.ie/movies/movie-reviews/top-gun-maverick-410633/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220526153654/http://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front-row/top-gun-maverick-reviewed-tom-cruise-takes-empty-thrills-to-new-heights
https://web.archive.org/web/20220926062114/https://www.nbcnews.com/think/opinion/top-gun-maverick-tom-cruises-new-hollywood-war-propaganda-movie-war-rcna30773
https://web.archive.org/web/20220817210723/https://www.aljazeera.com/opinions/2022/6/17/is-top-gun-still-fit-for-the-big-screen-in-the-21st-century
https://web.archive.org/web/20230115050124/https://jacobin.com/2022/06/top-gun-maverick-navy-recuitment-tom-cruise
https://web.archive.org/web/20230115050124/https://thereader.com/2022/05/27/top-gun-maverick-review/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220614123143/https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/business/business-news/paramount-hit-with-top-gun-copyright-lawsuit-from-original-article-authors-heirs-1235159719/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220615125031/https://variety.com/2022/film/news/top-gun-copyright-lawsuit-ehud-yonay-1235285752/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220616211937/https://www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-news/top-gun-maverick-copyright-lawsuit-1363783/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220617142808/https://www.reuters.com/business/media-telecom/paramount-is-sued-over-top-gun-maverick-2022-06-06/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220709020328/https://screenrant.com/top-gun-2-maverick-sequel-rooster-miles-teller/
https://web.archive.org/web/20220708043333/https://www.etonline.com/miles-teller-says-hes-had-conversations-with-tom-cruise-about-possible-top-gun-3-exclusive-186984
https://news.usni.org/2019/07/22/navy-answers-how-a-57-year-old-maverick-could-still-feel-the-need-for-speed
https://web.archive.org/web/20220709060705/https://news.usni.org/2019/07/22/navy-answers-how-a-57-year-old-maverick-could-still-feel-the-need-for-speed
https://www.gq.com/story/top-gun-maverick-military-advisor-interview
https://web.archive.org/web/20220706101301/https://www.gq.com/story/top-gun-maverick-military-advisor-interview
https://web.archive.org/web/20230418023940/https://deadline.com/2023/04/top-gun-maverick-box-office-profits-1235328891/
https://deadline.com/2023/04/top-gun-maverick-box-office-profits-1235328891/
https://store.interscope.com/products/top-gun-maverick-official-soundtrack-cd
https://web.archive.org/web/20220602084106/https://store.interscope.com/products/top-gun-maverick-official-soundtrack-cd
https://web.archive.org/web/20220813143920/https://music.paramount.com/albums/top-gun-maverick/
https://music.paramount.com/albums/top-gun-maverick/
https://www.the-numbers.com/movie/Top-Gun-Maverick-(2020)
https://variety.com/2022/film/news/quentin-tarantino-praises-top-gun-maverick-1235333722/#!
https://web.archive.org/web/20220806220841/https://variety.com/2022/film/news/quentin-tarantino-praises-top-gun-maverick-1235333722/#!
https://www.joblo.com/top-gun-maverick-ridley-scott/
https://web.archive.org/web/20221203055508/https://www.joblo.com/top-gun-maverick-ridley-scott/
https://www.fxguide.com/fxfeatured/flying-top-gun-maverick-with-ryan-tudhope/
https://web.archive.org/web/20230609011053/https://www.fxguide.com/fxfeatured/flying-top-gun-maverick-with-ryan-tudhope/
https://variety.com/2023/film/news/ridley-scott-watched-alien-romulus-great-1235759474//
https://web.archive.org/web/20231018184720/https://variety.com/2023/film/news/ridley-scott-watched-alien-romulus-great-1235759474/
https://web.archive.org/web/20190218172033/https://www.nbcsandiego.com/news/local/tom-cruise-top-gun-sequel-uss-theodore-roosevelt-reported-tensions-505966161.html
https://www.military.com/off-duty/movies/bar-top-gun-maverick-doesnt-exist-you-can-visit-real-location-inspired-it.html#:~:text=The%20place%20he%20took%20them,the%20bar%20in%20the%20film.
