Twelve O'Clock High
Twelve O'Clock High is a 1949 American war film directed by Henry King and based on the novel of the same name by Sy Bartlett and Beirne Lay, Jr. It stars Gregory Peck as Brig. General Frank Savage. Hugh Marlowe, Gary Merrill, Millard Mitchell, and Dean Jagger also appear in supporting roles.
The film was nominated for four Academy Awards and won two: Dean Jagger for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, and Thomas T. Moulton for Best Sound Recording. In 1998, Twelve O'Clock High was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".


== Plot ==
In 1949, former United States Army Air Forces officer Harvey Stovall spots a familiar Toby Jug in the window of a London antique shop and learns that it came from Archbury, an airfield where Stovall served during World War II. Convinced that it is the same jug which used to stand on the mantel of the airfield's officers' club, he buys it and journeys to the derelict airfield, where he reflects on his wartime experiences.
In a flashback, the setting shifts to 1942, when the 918th Bomb Group at Archbury has gained a reputation as the "hard luck group". After a particularly disastrous mission, group commander Colonel Keith Davenport appears exhausted and demoralized. His defeatist attitude spreads to other senior leaders of the group, including his Air Exec, Lieutenant Colonel Ben Gately. Ordered to fly another mission the next day, at a dangerously low altitude, Davenport protests to his friend, Brigadier General Frank Savage, the Assistant Chief of Staff for Operations at VIII Bomber Command. Later, Savage reluctantly shares with Major General Pritchard, the commanding general of VIII Bomber Command, his belief that Davenport has become emotionally too close to his men and may no longer be fit to command. That night, Pritchard and Savage visit the group headquarters to investigate the cause of the mission's heavy losses. Pritchard realizes that Savage is right: Davenport has become over-protective and is unwilling to discipline his men, even for costly mistakes. Davenport is relieved of command and Savage is asked to take over.
Savage takes a harsh approach to restoring the group's discipline and morale. He begins by reprimanding Gately, demoting him to aircraft commander and insisting that he henceforth fly every mission. Savage assigns Gately only the most incompetent crewmen, ordering him to paint the name "Leper Colony" on his airplane. Rough-and-ready Major Cobb impresses Savage with his independent spirit and replaces Gately as Air Exec. Savage conducts a series of training missions and waits for an opportunity to restore the group's pride in its abilities. Upset by the contrast of Savage's stern leadership with Davenport's easygoing ways, all of the group's pilots apply for transfers. Savage asks the Group Adjutant, Major Stovall, to delay processing their applications to buy him some time. An attorney in civilian life, Stovall knows how to use bureaucratic red tape to his advantage.
When the group returns to combat, all the groups are ordered to abort their mission due to heavy weather. Savage ignores the recall order. The 918th successfully bombs the target and is the only group to do so. All of its crews return safely. Though Pritchard is furious, Savage claims that he did not hear the recall due to a radio malfunction and instead persuades Pritchard to recommend the group for a Distinguished Unit Citation. Savage also acquires a surrogate son in Lieutenant Jesse Bishop, a Medal of Honor recipient who is Savage's eyes and ears among the combat aircrews.
When the Inspector General arrives to investigate the pilots' transfer requests, Savage packs his belongings, expecting to be relieved of command and possibly court-martialed. But, led by Bishop, the pilots withdraw their requests. Savage also softens his attitude towards the men as he becomes more closely involved with them. Gately goes on to win Savage's respect and admiration by demonstrating extraordinary leadership and courage in combat.
With enemy resistance intensifying as the air war advances deeper into Germany, missions become longer and riskier and many of Savage's best men are shot down or killed. Pritchard tries to get Savage to return to a staff job at VIII Bomber Command, but Savage feels that the 918th is not yet ready to do without him. Reluctantly, Pritchard leaves him in command. Ordered to return to the same target after a particularly brutal raid on a ball bearing factory, Savage finds himself physically unable to haul himself up into his B-17. Gately takes his place as lead pilot and strike commander for the mission. While waiting for the group's return, Savage becomes catatonic. Only as they return to Archbury does he regain his composure and fall asleep.
The story then returns to 1949, as Stovall pedals away from Archbury.


== Cast ==


== Historical counterparts of characters ==
The character Brigadier General Frank Savage was a composite of several group commanders, but the primary inspiration was Colonel Frank A. Armstrong, who commanded the 306th Bomb Group on which the 918th was modeled. The name "Savage" was inspired by Armstrong's Cherokee heritage. While his work with the 306th, which lasted only six weeks, consisted primarily of rebuilding the chain of command within the group, Armstrong had earlier performed a similar task with the 97th Bomb Group. Many of the training and disciplinary scenes in Twelve O'Clock High derive from that experience.
Towards the end of the film, the near-catatonic battle fatigue that General Savage suffered and the harrowing missions that led up to it were inspired by the experiences of Brigadier General Newton Longfellow. The symptoms of the breakdown were not based on any real-life event, but instead were intended to portray the effects of intense stress experienced by many airmen.Lieutenant General Pritchard was modeled on the VIII Bomber Command's first commander, Major General Ira C. Eaker.Colonel Keith Davenport was based on the first commander of the 306th Bomb Group, Colonel Charles B. Overacker, nicknamed "Chip". Of all the personalities portrayed in Twelve O'Clock High, that of Colonel Davenport most closely parallels his true-life counterpart. The early scene in which Davenport confronts Savage about a mission order was a close recreation of an actual event, as was his relief.
Major (later Lieutenant Colonel) Harvey Stovall, who is a former World War I U.S. Army Air Service pilot who has returned to active duty as a nonflying adjutant, was modeled on William Howard Stovall, a World War I flying ace who returned to active duty as a major in the USAAF the week following Pearl Harbor, and served as the nonflying deputy chief of staff for personnel for the 8th Air Force in England for his World War I comrades, Brigadier General Frank O'Driscoll Hunter and General Carl Spaatz.
Second Lieutenant Jesse Bishop (played by Robert Patten), who belly-lands in the B-17 next to the runway at the beginning of the film and was nominated for the Medal of Honor, had his true-life counterpart in Second Lieutenant John C. Morgan. The description of Bishop's fight to control the bomber after his pilot was hit in the head by fragments of a 20 mm cannon shell is taken almost verbatim from Morgan's Medal of Honor citation. Details may be found in The 12 O'Clock High Logbook. Patten had been a USAAF navigator in World War II, the only member of the cast with aircrew experience.
Sergeant McIllhenny was drawn from a member of the 306th Bomb Group, Sgt Donald Bevan, a qualified gunner who was assigned ground jobs, including part-time driver for the commander of his squadron. Bevan had received publicity as a stowaway gunner (similar to McIllhenny in the film), though in reality, he had been invited to fly missions. Like McIllhenny, he proved to be a "born gunner".
The "tough guy" character Major Joe Cobb was inspired by Colonel Paul Tibbets, who had flown B-17s with Colonel Armstrong. Tibbets was initially approved as the film's technical advisor in February 1949, but was replaced shortly after by Colonel John H. de Russy, a former operations officer for the 305th Bomb Group.


== Production ==
According to their files, 20th Century Fox paid $100,000 outright for the rights to the unfinished book, plus up to $100,000 more in escalator and book-club clauses. Darryl Zanuck was apparently convinced to pay this high price when he heard that William Wyler was interested in purchasing it for Paramount. Even then, Zanuck only went through with the deal in October 1947 when he was certain that the United States Air Force would support the production. The film made use of actual combat footage during the battle scenes, including some shot by the Luftwaffe. A good deal of the production was filmed on Eglin Air Force Base and its associated auxiliary fields near Fort Walton, Florida.


=== Source material ===
Screenwriters Bartlett and Lay drew on their own wartime experiences with Eighth Air Force bomber units. At the Eighth Air Force headquarters, Bartlett had worked closely with Colonel Armstrong, who was the primary model for the character General Savage. The film's 918th Bomber Group was modeled primarily on the 306th because that group remained a significant part of the Eighth Air Force throughout the war in Europe.


=== Casting ===
Clark Gable was interested in the lead role of General Frank Savage. Gable, who had served in the USAAF during World War II, played a similar role in the 1948 film Command Decision. John Wayne was offered the leading role, as well, but turned it down. Burt Lancaster, James Cagney, Dana Andrews, Van Heflin, Edmond O'Brien, Ralph Bellamy, Robert Preston, Robert Young, and Robert Montgomery were also considered for the role. Eventually, the role went to Gregory Peck, who initially turned it down because the script was similar to Command Decision.  Peck changed his mind because he was impressed with director Henry King, finding his empathy with the material and the cast and crew appealing. The two made more films together: The Gunfighter (1950), David and Bathsheba (1952), The Bravados (1958), and Beloved Infidel (1959).


=== Filming ===
Veterans of the heavy bomber campaign frequently cite Twelve O'Clock High as the only Hollywood film that accurately captured their combat experiences. Along with the 1948 film Command Decision, it marked a turning away from the optimistic, morale-boosting style of wartime films and toward a grittier realism that deals more directly with the human costs of war. Both films deal with the realities of daylight precision bombing without fighter escort, the basic USAAF doctrine at the start of World War II (prior to the arrival of long-range Allied fighter aircraft such as the P-51 Mustang). As producers, writers Lay and Bartlett reused major plot elements of Twelve O'Clock High in later films featuring the U.S. Air Force, the 1950s-era Toward the Unknown and the early 1960s Cold War-era A Gathering of Eagles.
Paul Mantz, Hollywood's leading stunt pilot, was paid the then-unprecedented sum of $4,500 to crash-land a B-17 bomber for one early scene in the film. Frank Tallman, Mantz' partner in Tallmantz Aviation, wrote in his autobiography that while many B-17s had been landed by one pilot, as far as he knew, this flight was the first time that a B-17 ever took off with only one pilot and no other crew; nobody was sure that it could be done. " The footage was used again in the 1962 film The War Lover.Locations for creating the bomber airfield at the fictional RAF Archbury were scouted by director Henry King, flying his own Beech Bonanza some 16,000 miles in February and March 1949. King visited Eglin AFB on March 8, 1949, and found an ideal location for principal photography several miles north of the main base at its Eglin AFB Auxiliary Field No. 3, better known as Duke Field, where the mock installation with 15 buildings (including a World War II control tower) were constructed to simulate RAF Archbury. The film's technical advisor, Colonel John de Russy, was stationed at Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, at the time, and suggested Ozark Army Air Field near Daleville, Alabama (now known as Cairns Army Airfield, adjacent to Fort Rucker). King chose Cairns as the location for filming B-17 takeoffs and landings, including the B-17 belly landing sequence, since the light-colored runways at Eglin did not match wartime runways in England, which had been black to make them less visible to enemy aircraft. When the crew arrived at Cairns, it was also considered as "ideal for shots of Harvey Stovall reminiscing about his World War II service", since the field was somewhat overgrown. The opening and closing scenes of the derelict RAF Archbury, referencing themes in the film, have a very similar approach to the opening scenes of the derelict fictional RAF Halfpenny Field in the earlier 1945 film The Way to the Stars.Additional background photography was shot at RAF Barford St John, a satellite station of RAF Croughton in Oxfordshire, England. Officially, the airfield is still under Ministry of Defence ownership following its closure in the late 1990s as a communications station linked to the since-closed RAF Upper Heyford. Other locations around Eglin AFB and Fort Walton also served as secondary locations for filming. The crew used 12 B-17s for filming, which were pulled from QB-17 drones used at Eglin and other B-17s from depot locations in Alabama and New Mexico. Since some of the aircraft had been used in the 1946 Bikini atomic experiments and absorbed high levels of radioactivity, they could only be used for shooting for limited periods.Twelve O'Clock High was in production from late April to early July 1949. Although originally planned to be shot in Technicolor, it was instead shot in black and white, allowing the inclusion of actual combat footage by Allied and Luftwaffe cameras.


== Reception ==
Twelve O'Clock High premiered in Los Angeles on December 21, 1949, and opened in New York City on January 26, 1950.  It went into general release in February 1950. An influential review by Bosley Crowther of The New York Times was indicative of many contemporary reviews. He noted that the film focused more on the human element than the aircraft or machinery of war. The Times picked Twelve O'Clock High as one of the 10 Best Films of 1949 and, in later years, it rated the film as one of the "Best 1000" of all time.After attending the premiere, the commander of the Strategic Air Command, General Curtis LeMay, told the authors that he "couldn't find anything wrong with it." It was required viewing at all the U.S. service academies, college/university Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps detachments, Air Force Officer Training Schools, the U.S. Navy's former Aviation Officer Candidate School, and the Coast Guard Officer Candidate School, where it was used as a teaching example for the situational leadership theory, although not currently used by the USAF. The film is also widely used in both the military and civilian worlds to teach the principles of leadership.Michael Gebert declares it the best film of 1949. and Christopher Tookey writes, it is "probably the best picture about the pressures which war imposes on those at the top."In its initial release, the film took in $3,225,000 in rentals in the U.S. alone.


== Awards and honors ==
Twelve O'Clock High won Academy Awards for Best Actor in a Supporting Role for Dean Jagger and Best Sound Recording. It was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role for Gregory Peck and Best Picture. In addition, Peck received the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor, and the film was nominated for Best Picture by the National Board of Review.In 1998, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains
Brigadier General Frank Savage – Nominated Hero


== Meaning of the title ==

The term "twelve o'clock high" refers to the practice of calling out the positions of attacking enemy aircraft by reference to an imaginary clock face, with the bomber at the center. The terms "high" (above the bomber), "level" (at the same altitude as the bomber) and "low" (below the bomber) further refine the location of the enemy. Thus "twelve o'clock high" meant the attacker was approaching from directly ahead and above. This location was preferred by German fighter pilots because, until the introduction of the Bendix chin turret in the B-17G model, the nose of the B-17 was the most lightly armed and vulnerable part of the bomber. Enemy fighter aircraft diving from above were also more difficult targets for the B-17 gunners due to their high closing speeds.
Bartlett's wife, actress Ellen Drew, named the story after hearing Bartlett and Lay discuss German fighter tactics, which usually involved head-on attacks from "twelve o'clock high".


== Radio and television ==

Gregory Peck repeated his role as General Savage on a Screen Guild Players radio broadcast on September 7, 1950.Twelve O'Clock High later became a television series of the same name that premiered on the ABC network in 1964 and ran for three seasons. Robert Lansing played General Savage. At the end of the first season, Lansing was replaced by Paul Burke, who played Colonel Joseph Anson "Joe" Gallagher, a character loosely based on Ben Gately from the novel. Much of the combat footage seen in the film was reused in the television series.
Many of the television show's ground scenes were filmed at the Chino, California, airport, which had been used for training Army pilots during the war, and where a replica of a control tower, typical of the type seen at an 8th Air Force airfield in England, was built. The airfield itself was used in the immediate postwar period as a dump for soon-to-be-scrapped fighters and bombers, and was used for the penultimate scene in The Best Years of Our Lives when Dana Andrews relives his wartime experiences and goes on to rebuild his life.


== References ==
Informational notes

Citations

Further reading


== External links ==
Twelve O’Clock High essay by Luisa F. Ribeiro at National Film Registry
Twelve O’Clock High essay by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010 ISBN 0826429777, pp. 431–432
Twelve O'Clock High at the TCM Movie Database
Twelve O'Clock High at IMDb
Twelve O'Clock High at AllMovie
Twelve O'Clock High at the American Film Institute Catalog
Twelve O'Clock High at Rotten Tomatoes12 O'Clock High: Bombing the Reich
12 O'Clock High (TV series)
20,000 Years in Sing Sing
2019 Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress crash
2022 Dallas airshow mid-air collision
23 1/2 Hours' Leave
305th Operations Group
306th Flying Training Group
42nd Street (film)
97th Air Mobility Wing
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Bell for Adano
A Broadway Butterfly
A Fugitive from Matrimony
A Game of Wits
A Gathering of Eagles
A Message to Garcia (film)
A Sporting Chance (1919 Pathe film)
A Yank in the R.A.F.
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Awards
Accidents and incidents involving the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress
Across the Pacific (1926 film)
Adjutant
Air Force (film)
Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps
Aircraft in fiction
Alabama
Alexander's Ragtime Band (film)
Alfred Newman (composer)
AllMovie
All About Eve
All American (aircraft)
All the World to Nothing
Aluminum Overcast
Always Goodbye (1938 film)
American Broadcasting Company
Any Woman
Atomic bomb
B-17 Flying Fortress units of the United States Army Air Forces
Baby Face (film)
Bakers Creek air crash
Ball bearing
Bally B-17
Barbara McLean
Beauty and the Rogue
Beechcraft Bonanza
Beirne Lay, Jr.
Beirne Lay Jr.
Belly landing
Beloved Infidel
Bikini atomic experiments
Blood Money (1933 film)
Blood and Sand (1941 film)
Boeing
Boeing 247
Boeing 307 Stratoliner
Boeing B-17G Flying Fortress No. 44-83690
Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress
Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress Units of the Mediterranean Theater of Operations
Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress variants
Boeing C-108 Flying Fortress
Boeing XB-15
Boeing XB-38 Flying Fortress
Boeing YB-40 Flying Fortress
Born to Be Bad (1934 film)
Bosley Crowther
Brass Buttons
Brigham Young (film)
Bulldog Drummond Strikes Back (1934 film)
Burt Lancaster
Cairns Army Airfield
Call of the Wild (1935 film)
Captain from Castile
Cardinal Richelieu (film)
Carl Spaatz
Carolina (1934 film)
Carousel (film)
Catatonic
Chad Hanna
Champaign Lady
Cherokee
China Girl (1942 film)
Chino, California
Clark Gable
Clock position
Cold War
Combat stress reaction
Command Decision (film)
Crack in the Mirror
Curtis LeMay
Daleville, Alabama
Dana Andrews
Darryl F. Zanuck
Darryl Zanuck
David and Bathsheba (film)
Dean Jagger
Dean Zanuck
Deep Waters (1948 film)
Dice of Destiny
Distinguished Unit Citation
Doctor X (film)
Doctrine
Donald Bevan
Down Argentine Way
Duke Field
Edmond O'Brien
Eglin Air Force Base
Ellen Drew
Enola Gay
Ex-Lady
Find Your Man
Flashback (narrative)
Flying ace
Folies Bergère de Paris
Footloose Widows
Fort Rucker
Fort Walton Beach, Florida
Fortress (2012 film)
Frank A. Armstrong
Frank O'Driscoll Hunter
Frank Tallman
Fury (1923 film)
Fury at Furnace Creek
G Men
Gary Merrill
Gentleman's Agreement
Good Time Charley
Gregory Peck
Happy Landing (1938 film)
Hardboiled Rose
Haunting Shadows
Hearts or Diamonds?
Hell's Angels (aircraft)
Hell Harbor
Help Wanted – Male
Henry King (director)
Hiroshima
Hobbs in a Hurry
Hogan's Alley (film)
Hollywood Cavalcade
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Hudson's Bay (film)
Hugh Marlowe
I'd Climb the Highest Mountain
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Loved You Wednesday
Illicit (film)
In Old Chicago
Inspector General
International Settlement (film)
Ira C. Eaker
Island in the Sun (film)
It Had to Happen
James Cagney
Jesse James (1939 film)
John C. Morgan
John Kellogg (actor)
John Wayne
Joy and the Dragon
Just Around the Corner (1938 film)
Kenneth Tobey
Kentucky Moonshine
King of the Khyber Rifles (film)
Lady Killer (1933 film)
Lancer Spy
Leon Shamroy
Les Misérables (1935 film)
Liberty Belle (aircraft)
Library of Congress
Life Begins (1932 film)
Lightnin' (1930 film)
List of Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress operators
List of Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress variants
List of surviving Boeing B-17 Flying Fortresses
Little Caesar (film)
Little Mary Sunshine (1916 film)
Little Miss Broadway
Little Old New York (1940 film)
Lloyd's of London (film)
Looking for Trouble (1934 film)
Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing (film)
Luftwaffe
Madonna of Avenue A
Margie (1946 film)
Marie Galante (film)
Martin Caidin
Maryland (1940 film)
Maxwell Air Force Base
Maybe It's Love (1930 film)
Medal of Honor
Memphis Belle: A Story of a Flying Fortress
Memphis Belle (aircraft)
Memphis Belle (film)
Merely Mary Ann
Metropolitan (1935 film)
Millard Mitchell
Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)
Moulin Rouge (1934 film)
Mount Tom B-17 crash
My Gal Sal (aircraft)
My Lucky Star (1938 film)
My Man (1928 film)
National Board of Review
National Film Registry
New York Film Critics Circle Awards
Nine-O-Nine
No Way Out (1950 film)
Noah's Ark (1928 film)
O. Henry's Full House
Officer Training School
Old 666
Old San Francisco
One Hour Before Dawn
One More Spring
Over the Hill (1931 film)
Oxfordshire
P-51 Mustang
Parachute Jumper
Paramount Pictures
Partners Again
Paul Burke (actor)
Paul Mantz
Paul Stewart (actor)
Paul Tibbets
Pay Dirt
People Will Talk
Piccadilly Lilly II
Pigskin Parade
Pinky (film)
Poor Little Rich Girl (1936 film)
Powers That Prey
Prince of Foxes (film)
Professional Soldier
RAF Barford St John
RAF Croughton
RAF Upper Heyford
Ralph Bellamy
Ramona (1936 film)
Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm (1938 film)
Red Hot Tires (1925 film)
Red tape
Remember the Day
Richard D. Zanuck
Rin Tin Tin
Robert Arthur (actor)
Robert Lansing (actor)
Robert Montgomery (actor)
Robert Patten (actor)
Robert Preston (actor)
Robert Young (actor)
Romola (film)
Rose of Washington Square
Rotten Tomatoes
Sackcloth and Scarlet
Sally B
Salvage (1921 film)
Sam Edwards
Sanctuary (1961 film)
Say It with Songs
Screen Guild Players
Sentimental Journey (aircraft)
Seventh Heaven (1937 film)
Sex Hygiene
Shadows and Sunshine
She Goes to War
Shoo Shoo Shoo Baby
Should a Wife Forgive?
Sing, Baby, Sing
Sir Baboon McGoon
Situational leadership theory
Six Feet Four
Slave Ship (1937 film)
Social Briars
Some Liar
Son of Fury: The Story of Benjamin Blake
Sonny (1922 film)
Souls in Pawn (1917 film)
Southern Pride (film)
Stanley and Livingstone
State Fair (1933 film)
State Street Sadie
Stella Dallas (1925 film)
Stowaway
Strategic Air Command
Submarine Patrol
Sunshine and Gold
Swamp Ghost
Swanee River (1939 film)
Sy Bartlett
Tail Spin
Ten Gentlemen from West Point
Tender Is the Night (film)
Tenderloin (film)
Texas Raiders
Thanks a Million
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Better 'Ole (1926 film)
The Big Gamble (1961 film)
The Black Swan (film)
The Bond Boy
The Bowery (film)
The Bravados
The Bride's Silence
The Cabin in the Cotton
The Caveman (1926 film)
The Chapman Report
The Climber (1917 film)
The Country Doctor (1936 film)
The Dark Horse (1932 film)
The Desired Woman
The Doorway to Hell
The Egyptian (film)
The Eyes of the World (1930 film)
The First Auto
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great American Broadcast
The Great Profile
The Gunfighter
The Jazz Singer
The Life of the Party (1930 film)
The Lighthouse by the Sea
The Little Irish Girl
The Little Princess (1939 film)
The Locked Heart
The Longest Day (film)
The Magic Flame
The Man I Married
The Man Who Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo (film)
The Man Who Played God (1932 film)
The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit
The Mark of Zorro (1940 film)
The Mate of the Sally Ann
The Midnight Taxi
The Mighty Barnum
The Mistress of Shenstone
The New York Times
The Pink Lady (aircraft)
The Prisoner of Shark Island
The Public Enemy
The Purple Heart
The Rains Came
The Razor's Edge (1946 film)
The Return of Frank James
The Rich Are Always with Us
The Road to Glory
The Roots of Heaven (film)
The Seventh Day (1922 film)
The Show of Shows
The Snake Pit
The Snows of Kilimanjaro (1952 film)
The Social Highwayman
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sting of the Lash
The Story of Alexander Graham Bell
The Sun Also Rises (1957 film)
The Swoose
The View from Pompey's Head
The Visit (1964 film)
The War Lover
The Way to the Stars
The White Dove (1920 film)
The White Sister (1923 film)
The Winning of Barbara Worth
The Woman Disputed
The Woman in Room 13 (1932 film)
The Working Man
Thin Ice (1937 film)
This Above All (film)
This Earth Is Mine (1959 film)
This Hero Stuff
This Is My Affair
Thomas T. Moulton
Three Faces East (1930 film)
Three Weeks in Paris
Three on a Match
Thunder Birds (1942 film)
Thunderbird (aircraft)
To the Shores of Tripoli
Tobacco Road (film)
Toby Jug
Tol'able David
Told at Twilight
Toward the Unknown
Tracked by the Police
Turner Classic Movies
Twelve O'Clock High (TV series)
Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation
Twin Kiddies
U.S. Army Air Service
USAAF
USAAF Boeing B-17 crash on North Barrule
Uncharted Channels
Under Two Flags (1936 film)
United States Army Air Forces
Untamed (1955 film)
Up Romance Road
VIII Bomber Command
Van Heflin
Vengeance of the Dead
Virginia Fox
Viva Zapata!
Wait till the Sun Shines, Nellie (film)
Wake Up and Live
War film
Way Down East (1935 film)
Wayback Machine
Wee Willie Winkie (film)
When We Were 21
When a Man Rides Alone (1919 film)
Where the West Begins (1919 film)
Wife, Husband and Friend
William Howard Stovall
William Wyler
Wilson (1944 film)
Winged Victory (film)
World War I
Yankee Lady
http://www.ospreypublishing.com/articles/world_war_2/12_oclock_high/
http://www.aerovintage.com/12oclock.htm
http://www.kval.com/news/local/96338604.html
http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9E05E3DF173DE03BBC4051DFB766838B649EDE
http://www.history.army.mil/html/moh/wwII-m-s.html
http://www.aerovintage.com/warlover.htm
http://www.airforcemag.com/MagazineArchive/Pages/2011/January%202011/0111high.aspx
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1950
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v51292
https://www.loc.gov/loc/lcib/9812/film.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20110715020647/http://www.ospreypublishing.com/articles/world_war_2/12_oclock_high/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0041996/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0041996/locations
https://www.imdb.com/name/nm1074742/
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0041996/releaseinfo
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0041996/business
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0041996/awards
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/26164
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1022172-twelve_oclock_high
https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/
https://www.loc.gov/static/programs/national-film-preservation-board/documents/twelve_clock.pdf
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1194888#identifiers
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14662885w
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14662885w
https://viaf.org/viaf/305887132
https://www.airspacemag.com/history-of-flight/twelve-oclock-high-180970369/
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/94088/enwp
https://web.archive.org/web/20080430113840/http://www.history.army.mil/html/moh/wwII-m-s.html
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/94088/twelve-oclock-high#notes
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/94088/twelve-oclock-high#trivia
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/94088/twelve-oclock-high#overview
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/twelve-oclock-high-v51292/awards
https://www.movie-locations.com/movies/t/Twelve-O-Clock-High.php
https://www.airfieldresearchgroup.org.uk/forum/airfield-discussion/160-archbury-12-o-clock-high
http://www.screenonline.org.uk/film/id/477021/index.html
https://books.google.com/books?id=WIZwZOz8LHsC&dq=aubrey+solomon+20th+century+fox&pg=PA212
https://books.google.com/books?id=uHNvAeD4yR4C&q=chapter+three
https://books.google.com/books?id=deq3xI8OmCkC
