Wilson (1944 film)
Wilson is a 1944 biographical film about Woodrow Wilson, the 28th president of the United States. Shot in Technicolor and directed by Henry King, the film stars Alexander Knox, Charles Coburn, Geraldine Fitzgerald, Thomas Mitchell, Ruth Nelson, Sir Cedric Hardwicke, Vincent Price, William Eythe and Mary Anderson.
A deep admirer of Wilson, distributor 20th Century Fox president Darryl F. Zanuck personally oversaw production. Character actor Knox was given one of his few chances to play a lead.
Wilson received critical acclaim, earning ten nominations at the 17th Academy Awards and winning five, including Best Writing, Original Screenplay. However, it was a box office bomb due to its unusually high budget. This upset Zanuck to the point that for years, he forbade employees from mentioning the film in his presence.


== Plot ==
In 1909, Woodrow Wilson is the president of Princeton University and the author of several books on the democratic process. The local Democratic Party political machine convinces him to run for governor of New Jersey. After he wins the election in 1910, Wilson proves himself independent of the machine and its interests, fighting for progressive causes.
The U.S. is going through a progressive change in national politics and a split is developing in the Republican Party, providing a chance for Wilson to win on the Democratic ticket. He receives the party's nomination and wins the presidency in 1912. He pushes through a series of programs, called 'The New Freedom'. When World War I breaks out in Europe in 1914, Wilson tries to keep the U.S. neutral. At the same time, his wife Ellen dies of Bright's disease.
Early in 1915, at around the same time of the sinking of the RMS Lusitania, he meets Edith Bolling Galt, a Washington D.C. widow, whom he marries in December 1915. He wins reelection in 1916, and as he starts his second term, the war finally comes to America. In 1918, the Allies defeat the Central Powers, and Wilson travels to France to have a hand in the Paris Peace Conference. He intends to establish his long-promised League of Nations, but many Republican senators, including Henry Cabot Lodge, feel the president is leaving the United States vulnerable to future wars, and decide to veto whatever treaty he brings back.
President Wilson takes the issue to the people in a multi-state tour, but his health fails and days after returning to Washington, he suffers a stroke. Edith shields the president and screens visitors, leading some to question how powerful she is and how much Wilson is truly acting as president. In the end, Wilson recovers enough to see the election of Republican Warren G. Harding, who has promised to keep the country out of the League of Nations. As Wilson's administration ends, he laments his failure but remains hopeful that the League will, in some form or another, be successful in the future.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Wilson was initially intended as a historical drama about a fictional American family living during the Progressive Era before being rewritten by Lamar Trotti into a biopic about Woodrow Wilson. Wilson's daughter, Eleanor Wilson McAdoo, served as an informal counselor. Journalist Ray Stannard Baker, an authority on Wilson, served as an adviser.


=== Casting ===
Before Knox was cast as Wilson, Ronald Colman and Frank Conroy were considered. Claudette Colbert was also considered for one of Wilson's wives. Dwight Frye was cast as Secretary of War Newton D. Baker but died of a heart attack on November 7, 1943, a few days prior to his filming start. Ernest Palmer was hired as cinematographer but had to be replaced by Leon Shamroy after falling ill, while James Basevi quit as art director due to disagreements with the rest of the crew.


=== Filming ===
With a budget of $5.2 million, Wilson was Fox's then most expensive film. Much of the costs went to constructing accurate sets for White House locations such as the East Room, the Blue Room, the Oval Office and the Lincoln Bedroom. Scenes of the Democratic National Convention were shot at Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles while scenes set at Princeton were shot on-location in Trenton, New Jersey. Other scenes were shot at the Biltmore Theater in Los Angeles; Pueblo, Colorado; and Midwick Country Club in Alhambra, California.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Wilson was promoted by the NBC Blue Network radio show Hall of Fame Broadcast with a radio adaptation of sections of the script.It reportedly lost $2 million for Fox. Sales were damaged due to the United States Department of War prohibiting its exhibition on Armed Forces bases during World War II under provisions of the Soldier Voting Act against the screening of political material that could influence elections such as the ones about to be held on November 7, 1944.


=== Responses ===
The film received generally positive reviews but was not without its detractors. The New Republic film critic Manny Farber was particularly unenthusiastic, calling the production "costly, tedious and impotent" while writing: "The effect of the movie is similar to the one produced by the sterile post-card albums you buy in railroad stations, which unfold like accordions and show you the points of interest in the city ... The producers must have known far more about the World War, the peace-making at Versailles, and Wilson himself, but that is kept out of the movie in the same way that slum sections are kept out of post-card albums ... About three-quarters of the way through, a large amount of actual newsreel from the first World War is run off and the strength of it makes the film that comes before and after seem comical."President Franklin D. Roosevelt, a protege of Wilson's, screened the film for guests at the Second Quebec Conference in 1944. British Prime Minister Winston S. Churchill, however, was no fan, excusing himself mid-film before going to bed.


=== Awards ===
Despite the negative press and lackluster commercial performance, the film received ten nominations at the 17th Academy Awards, winning five:

Best Art Direction-Interior Decoration, Color (Wiard Ihnen and Thomas Little)
Best Cinematography, Color (Leon Shamroy)
Best Film Editing (Barbara McLean)
Best Sound, Recording (E. H. Hansen)
Best Writing, Original Screenplay (Lamar Trotti)Wilson was also nominated for:

Best Picture (Darryl F. Zanuck)
Best Director (Henry King)
Best Actor in a Leading Role (Alexander Knox)
Best Music, Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture (Alfred Newman)
Best Effects, Special Effects (Fred Sersen and Roger Heman Sr.)


== Preservation ==
The Academy Film Archive preserved Wilson in 2006.


== References ==


== External links ==
Wilson at the American Film Institute Catalog
Wilson at IMDb
Wilson at AllMovie
Wilson at the TCM Movie Database
Wilson at Rotten Tomatoes17th Academy Awards
1910 New Jersey gubernatorial election
1912 Democratic National Convention
1912 United States presidential election
1913 State of the Union Address
1914 State of the Union Address
1915 State of the Union Address
1916 Democratic National Convention
1916 State of the Union Address
1916 United States presidential election
1917 State of the Union Address
1918 State of the Union Address
1920 State of the Union Address
1944 United States elections
20,000 Years in Sing Sing
20th Century Studios
23 1/2 Hours' Leave
42nd Street (film)
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Bell for Adano
A Broadway Butterfly
A Fugitive from Matrimony
A Game of Wits
A Message to Garcia (film)
A Sporting Chance (1919 Pathe film)
A Yank in the R.A.F.
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects
Academy Film Archive
Across the Pacific (1926 film)
Alexander's Ragtime Band (film)
Alexander Knox
Alfred Newman (composer)
Alhambra, California
AllMovie
All About Eve
All the World to Nothing
Allies
Always Goodbye (1938 film)
American Commission to Negotiate Peace
American entry into World War I
Any Woman
Baby Face (film)
Backstairs at the White House
Barbara McLean
Beauty and the Rogue
Beloved Infidel
Bernard Baruch
Bibliography of Woodrow Wilson
Big Four (World War I)
Biographical film
Blood Money (1933 film)
Blood and Sand (1941 film)
Blue Network
Blue Room (White House)
Born to Be Bad (1934 film)
Box office bomb
Brass Buttons
Brigham Young (film)
Bright's disease
Bryan–Chamorro Treaty
Bulldog Drummond Strikes Back (1934 film)
Call of the Wild (1935 film)
Captain from Castile
Cardinal Richelieu (film)
Carolina (1934 film)
Carousel (film)
Cary Grayson
Cedric Hardwicke
Celestial Sphere Woodrow Wilson Memorial
Central Powers
Chad Hanna
Champ Clark
Character actor
Charles Coburn
Charles Halton
China Girl (1942 film)
Claudette Colbert
Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914
Committee on Public Information
Count Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff
Covenant of the League of Nations
Crack in the Mirror
Darryl F. Zanuck
David and Bathsheba (film)
Dean Zanuck
Deep Waters (1948 film)
Democratic National Convention
Democratic Party (United States)
Democratic process
Dice of Destiny
Doctor X (film)
Down Argentine Way
Dwight Frye
East Room
Eddie Foy Jr.
Eddie Foy Sr.
Edith Bolling Galt Wilson
Edith Wilson
Edmund H. Hansen
Edward M. House
Edwin Maxwell (actor)
Eleanor Wilson
Eleanor Wilson McAdoo
Elections in the United States
Electoral History of Woodrow Wilson
Ellen Axson Wilson
Ernest Palmer (American cinematographer)
Espionage Act of 1917
Eula Morgan
Europe
Ex-Lady
Federal Aid Road Act of 1916
Federal Employees' Compensation Act
Federal Farm Loan Act
Federal Reserve Act
Federal Trade Commission
Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914
Find Your Man
First inauguration of Woodrow Wilson
Flag Day (United States)
Folies Bergère de Paris
Footloose Widows
Four Minute Men
Fourteen Points
Francis Bowes Sayre Jr.
Francis X. Bushman
Frank Conroy (actor)
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Fred Sersen
Fury (1923 film)
Fury at Furnace Creek
G Men
Gentleman's Agreement
Georges Clemenceau
Geraldine Fitzgerald
Good Time Charley
Governor of New Jersey
Hal Erickson (author)
Happy Landing (1938 film)
Hardboiled Rose
Harlakenden
Haunting Shadows
Heart attack
Hearts or Diamonds?
Helen Woodrow Bones
Hell Harbor
Help Wanted – Male
Henry Cabot Lodge
Henry King (director)
History of Princeton University
Hobbs in a Hurry
Hogan's Alley (film)
Hollywood Cavalcade
Home front during World War I
How Green Was My Valley (film)
Hudson's Bay (film)
I'd Climb the Highest Mountain
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Loved You Wednesday
Illicit (film)
In Old Chicago
International Settlement (film)
Island in the Sun (film)
It Had to Happen
J. M. Kerrigan
James Basevi
James Rennie (actor)
James Wilson (journalist)
Jefferson Literary and Debating Society
Jesse James (1939 film)
Jessie Woodrow Wilson Sayre
John Ince (actor)
Jones Law (Philippines)
Joseph Patrick Tumulty
Joseph Ruggles Wilson
Josephus Daniels
Joy and the Dragon
Just Around the Corner (1938 film)
Katherine Locke
Kennedy–King College
Kentucky Moonshine
King of the Khyber Rifles (film)
Lady Killer (1933 film)
Lamar Trotti
Lancer Spy
Large denominations of United States currency
League of Nations
Leon Shamroy
Les Misérables (1935 film)
Life Begins (1932 film)
Lightnin' (1930 film)
Lincoln Bedroom
List of Nobel Peace Prize laureates
List of federal judges appointed by Woodrow Wilson
List of governors of New Jersey
List of memorials to Woodrow Wilson
List of presidents of Princeton University
List of presidents of the United States
Little Caesar (film)
Little Mary Sunshine (1916 film)
Little Miss Broadway
Little Old New York (1940 film)
Lloyd's of London (film)
Looking for Trouble (1934 film)
Louis Brandeis Supreme Court nomination
Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing (film)
Madonna of Avenue A
Manny Farber
Marcel Dalio
Margaret Woodrow Wilson
Margie (1946 film)
Marie Galante (film)
Mary Anderson (actress, born 1918)
Maryland (1940 film)
Maybe It's Love (1930 film)
Merely Mary Ann
Metropolitan (1935 film)
Moulin Rouge (1934 film)
My Lucky Star (1938 film)
My Man (1928 film)
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics
National War Labor Board (1918–1919)
New Jersey
Newton D. Baker
Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
No Way Out (1950 film)
Noah's Ark (1928 film)
O. Henry's Full House
Old San Francisco
One Hour Before Dawn
One More Spring
Oval Office
Over the Hill (1931 film)
Parachute Jumper
Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)
Partners Again
Pay Dirt
People Will Talk
Pigskin Parade
Pinky (film)
Political machine
Poor Little Rich Girl (1936 film)
Powers That Prey
Presidency of Woodrow Wilson
President of the United States
Presidential transition of Woodrow Wilson
Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps
Prime Minister David Lloyd George
Prince of Foxes (film)
Princeton School of Public and International Affairs
Princeton University
Professional Soldier
Profiles in Courage (TV series)
Progressive Era
Pueblo, Colorado
Pueblo speech
Radio program
Ramona (1936 film)
Ray Stannard Baker
Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm (1938 film)
Red Hot Tires (1925 film)
Remember the Day
Republican Party (United States)
Revenue Act of 1913
Richard D. Zanuck
Rin Tin Tin
Robert Lansing
Roger Heman Sr.
Romola (film)
Ronald Colman
Rose of Washington Square
Rotten Tomatoes
Ruth Ford (actress)
Ruth Nelson (actress)
Sackcloth and Scarlet
Salvage (1921 film)
Samuel J. Friedman Theatre
Sanctuary (1961 film)
Say It with Songs
Second Quebec Conference
Second inauguration of Woodrow Wilson
Sedition Act of 1918
Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library
Selective Service Act of 1917
Seventh Heaven (1937 film)
Sex Hygiene
Shadow Lawn (New Jersey)
Shadows and Sunshine
She Goes to War
Should a Wife Forgive?
Shrine Auditorium
Sidney Blackmer
Silent Sentinels
Sing, Baby, Sing
Sinking of the RMS Lusitania
Six Feet Four
Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
Slave Ship (1937 film)
Social Briars
Soldier Voting Act
Some Liar
Son of Fury: The Story of Benjamin Blake
Sonny (1922 film)
Souls in Pawn (1917 film)
Southern Pride (film)
Stanley Logan
Stanley Ridges
Stanley and Livingstone
State Fair (1933 film)
State Street Sadie
Statue of Woodrow Wilson (Austin, Texas)
Stella Dallas (1925 film)
Stroke
Submarine Patrol
Suffs
Sunshine and Gold
Swanee River (1939 film)
Tail Spin
Technicolor
Ten Gentlemen from West Point
Tender Is the Night (film)
Tenderloin (film)
Thanks a Million
The American Spectator
The Better 'Ole (1926 film)
The Big Gamble (1961 film)
The Black Swan (film)
The Bond Boy
The Bowery (film)
The Bravados
The Bride's Silence
The Cabin in the Cotton
The Caveman (1926 film)
The Chapman Report
The Climber (1917 film)
The Country Doctor (1936 film)
The Dark Horse (1932 film)
The Desired Woman
The Doorway to Hell
The Egyptian (film)
The Eyes of the World (1930 film)
The First Auto
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great American Broadcast
The Great Profile
The Gunfighter
The Inquiry
The Jazz Singer
The Life of the Party (1930 film)
The Lighthouse by the Sea
The Little Irish Girl
The Little Princess (1939 film)
The Locked Heart
The Longest Day (film)
The Magic Flame
The Man I Married
The Man Who Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo (film)
The Man Who Played God (1932 film)
The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit
The Mark of Zorro (1940 film)
The Mate of the Sally Ann
The Midnight Taxi
The Mighty Barnum
The Mistress of Shenstone
The New Freedom
The New Republic
The New York Times
The Prisoner of Shark Island
The Public Enemy
The Purple Heart
The Rains Came
The Razor's Edge (1946 film)
The Return of Frank James
The Rich Are Always with Us
The Road to Glory
The Roots of Heaven (film)
The Seventh Day (1922 film)
The Show of Shows
The Snake Pit
The Snows of Kilimanjaro (1952 film)
The Social Highwayman
The Song of Bernadette (film)
The Sting of the Lash
The Story of Alexander Graham Bell
The Sun Also Rises (1957 film)
The View from Pompey's Head
The Visit (1964 film)
The White Dove (1920 film)
The White Sister (1923 film)
The Wilson Quarterly
The Winning of Barbara Worth
The Woman Disputed
The Woman in Room 13 (1932 film)
The Working Man
Theodore Roosevelt desk
Thin Ice (1937 film)
This Above All (film)
This Earth Is Mine (1959 film)
This Hero Stuff
This Is My Affair
Thomas Little
Thomas Mitchell (actor)
Three Faces East (1930 film)
Three Weeks in Paris
Three on a Match
Thunder Birds (1942 film)
Thurston Hall
Timeline of the Woodrow Wilson presidency
To the Shores of Tripoli
Tobacco Road (film)
Tol'able David
Told at Twilight
Tonio Selwart
Tracked by the Police
Treaty of Versailles
Trenton, New Jersey
Turner Classic Movies
Twelve O'Clock High
Twin Kiddies
Uncharted Channels
Under Two Flags (1936 film)
United States Armed Forces
United States Department of War
United States campaigns in World War I
United States occupation of Haiti
Untamed (1955 film)
Up Romance Road
Vengeance of the Dead
Vincent Price
Virginia Fox
Viva Zapata!
Wait till the Sun Shines, Nellie (film)
Wake Up and Live
Warren G. Harding
Washington D.C.
Washington National Cathedral
Way Down East (1935 film)
Wayback Machine
Wee Willie Winkie (film)
When We Were 21
When a Man Rides Alone (1919 film)
Where the West Begins (1919 film)
White House
Wiard Ihnen
Wife, Husband and Friend
William Eythe
William Gibbs McAdoo
William Howard Taft
William Jennings Bryan
Wilson (book)
Wilson Square
Wilsonian Armenia
Wilsonianism
Winged Victory (film)
Winston S. Churchill
Woman Suffrage Procession
Woodrow Wilson
Woodrow Wilson Awards
Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home
Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home (Columbia, South Carolina)
Woodrow Wilson Bridge
Woodrow Wilson Foundation
Woodrow Wilson High School (disambiguation)
Woodrow Wilson House (Washington, D.C.)
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
Woodrow Wilson Monument
Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation
Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library
Woodrow Wilson Supreme Court candidates
Woodrow Wilson and race
Woodrow Wilson and the Birth of the American Century
World War I
World War II
http://spectator.org/archives/2010/07/16/americas-ruling-class-and-the/print
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1945
https://archive.org/stream/variety161-1946-03#page/n132/mode/1up
http://www.oscars.org/academy-film-archive/preserved-projects?title=wilson&filmmaker=&category=All&collection=All
https://www.nytimes.com/movies/movie/54699/Wilson/overview
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v54699
https://web.archive.org/web/20110225210548/http://spectator.org/archives/2010/07/16/americas-ruling-class-and-the/print
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0037465/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/24253
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/wilson
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q606928#identifiers
https://web.archive.org/web/20131112062137/http://www.nytimes.com/movies/movie/54699/Wilson/overview
https://books.google.com/books?id=hNtqmyR-MNMC&q=%22Dwight+Frye%22&pg=PA468
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/95931/enwp
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no2020045208
