Wuthering Heights (1939 film)
Wuthering Heights is a 1939 American romantic period drama film directed by William Wyler, produced by Samuel Goldwyn, starring Merle Oberon, Laurence Olivier and David Niven, and based on the 1847 novel Wuthering Heights by Emily Brontë. The film depicts only 16 of the novel's 34 chapters, eliminating the second generation of characters. The novel was adapted for the screen by Charles MacArthur, Ben Hecht and John Huston (uncredited). The supporting cast features Flora Robson and Geraldine Fitzgerald.
It was primarily filmed in Thousand Oaks, California, with scenes shot in Wildwood Regional Park and at the current site of California Lutheran University.The film won the 1939 New York Film Critics Award for Best Film. It earned nominations for eight Academy Awards, including for Best Picture, Best Director and Best Actor. The 1940 Academy Award for Best Cinematography, black-and-white category, was awarded to Gregg Toland for his work. Nominated for original score (but losing to The Wizard of Oz) was the prolific film composer Alfred Newman, whose poignant "Cathy's Theme" does so much "to maintain its life as a masterpiece of romantic filmmaking."In 2007, Wuthering Heights was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".


== Plot ==
A traveler named Lockwood is caught in the snow and stays at the estate of Wuthering Heights, despite the cold behavior of his host Heathcliff. Late that night, after being shown into an upstairs room that was once a bridal chamber, Lockwood is awakened by a cold draft and finds the window shutter flapping back and forth. Just as he is about to close it, he feels an icy hand clutching his and hears a woman outside calling, "Heathcliff, let me in! I'm lost in the moors. It's Cathy!" Lockwood calls Heathcliff and tells him what he saw, whereupon the enraged Heathcliff throws him out of the room. Once Lockwood is gone, Heathcliff frantically calls out to Cathy and runs down the stairs and into the snowstorm. Ellen, the housekeeper, tells the amazed Lockwood that he has seen the ghost of Cathy Earnshaw, Heathcliff's only great love, who died years ago. When Lockwood says that he doesn't believe in ghosts, Ellen tells him that he might if she told him the story of Cathy, and he asks her to do so, intrigued.
As a boy, Heathcliff is found on the streets of Liverpool by Mr. Earnshaw, who brings him home to live with his two children, Cathy and Hindley. At first reluctant, Cathy eventually welcomes Heathcliff, and they become very close, but Hindley treats him as an outcast, especially after Mr. Earnshaw dies. About ten years later, the now-grown Heathcliff and Cathy have fallen in love and are meeting secretly at Penistone Crags on the moors. Hindley has become dissolute and tyrannical towards Cathy and the servants and forces Heathcliff to be a stable boy out of hatred for him.
One night as Cathy and Heathcliff are out together, they hear music and realize that their neighbors, the Linton family, are having a party. The pair sneak inside the Lintons' estate by climbing over their garden wall, but the dogs are alerted and attack them.  One of the dogs bites Cathy, and she suffers a severe leg injury. Heathcliff is forced to leave Cathy in their care. Enraged that the Lintons' glamor and wealth would so entrance Cathy, he blames the family for her injury and curses them all.
Cathy fully recuperates while staying for months with the Lintons, then returns home. Edgar Linton has fallen in love with Cathy and soon proposes; after Edgar takes her back to Wuthering Heights, she tells Ellen what has happened. Ellen reminds her about Heathcliff, but Cathy flippantly remarks that it would degrade her to marry him. Heathcliff overhears and leaves before he can hear Cathy realize aloud that she belongs with him, not Edgar, despite their class difference. When she discovers Heathcliff has overheard, she runs after him into the moors during a raging storm. Edgar finds her cold and ill. He summons the local doctor, Kenneth, who nurses her back to health. Soon after her recovery, Cathy and Edgar marry.
Heathcliff then disappears but returns years later, now wealthy and elegant. He has refined his appearance and manners to impress Cathy, and secretly buys Wuthering Heights from Hindley, whose gambling and heavy drinking have brought him to financial ruin. Cathy remains with Edgar despite Heathcliff's return and denies her love for him; to spite Cathy, Heathcliff begins courting Edgar's naïve sister, Isabella. Despite Cathy's objecting strongly to both Isabella and Heathcliff, the two eventually marry. A brokenhearted Cathy soon falls gravely ill. Heathcliff rushes to her side against the wishes of a now disillusioned and bitter Isabella. Cathy finally tells Heathcliff that she loves only him, and they reconcile, forgiving each other. At her request, Heathcliff carries Cathy to the window, so she can see the moors for the last time before dying in Heathcliff's arms. Heathcliff asks Cathy to haunt him until the day he dies.
As Ellen finishes her story, Dr. Kenneth arrives and tells Ellen and Lockwood that he saw Heathcliff on the moors with a woman, only to find Heathcliff's corpse alone in the snow. Ellen realizes that he saw the ghosts of Heathcliff and Cathy, who now haunt Penistone Crags together.


== Novel sections omitted in film ==
The film significantly shortened the plot of the novel. Originally, the book was divided into two volumes, the first involving Cathy and Heathcliff, and the second later in time involving Heathcliff's interactions with Cathy's daughter, also called Catherine, Heathcliff's son by Isabella, Linton, and Hindley's son Hareton. In the film the second volume, and thus the children and their stories, is omitted.
Because the film cuts that large amount, some of the characters are shifted or omitted. For example, the present-time beginning and ending of the film provide a frame for the flashback in both the film and book; but in the film, Isabella is still the supposed mistress of the household, whereas in the novel time has proceeded to the point where the younger Catherine is the primary female resident. In general, Heathcliff's apparent contact with Cathy's spirit and his subsequent death is preserved as the ending of the film, although it takes place sooner in time, and in a somewhat different way.


== Cast ==
Merle Oberon as Catherine Earnshaw Linton
Laurence Olivier as Heathcliff
David Niven as Edgar Linton
Flora Robson as Ellen Dean
Geraldine Fitzgerald as Isabella Linton
Hugh Williams as Hindley Earnshaw
Donald Crisp as Dr. Kenneth
Leo G. Carroll as Joseph
Miles Mander as Mr. Lockwood - the stranger
Cecil Kellaway as Earnshaw, Cathy's father
Cecil Humphreys as Judge Linton
Sarita Wooton as Cathy – as a Child (as Sarita Wooten)
Rex Downing as Heathcliff – as a Child
Douglas Scott as Hindley – as a Child
Vernon Downing as Giles
Alice Ehlers  – "Miss Erliss", harpsichordist


== Production ==
The project was initially intended as a vehicle for Merle Oberon, who was under contract with Goldwyn at the time. However, when Laurence Olivier was cast as Heathcliff, Vivien Leigh wanted to play the lead role with her then-lover and future husband. Studio executives felt the role could not go to an actress who was largely unknown in America, but they did offer Leigh the part of Isabella Linton. She declined, and Geraldine Fitzgerald was cast. Leigh was cast in Gone with the Wind the same year, for which she won an Academy Award for Best Actress; Merle Oberon did not receive a nomination for her performance.
There were clashes on the set between the actors and the director. Both of the leading players began work on the film miserable at having to leave their loved ones back in the United Kingdom; Olivier missed his fiancée Vivien Leigh, and Oberon had recently fallen in love with film producer Alexander Korda. Merle Oberon and Laurence Olivier also apparently detested each other, this despite that both of them appeared together the year before for The Divorce of Lady X. Witnesses recall Oberon's scolding Olivier for accidentally spitting on her during a particularly romantic balcony scene. Oberon shouted to Wyler "Tell him to stop spitting at me!" Olivier retorted by shouting "What's a little spit for Chrissake, between actors? You bloody little idiot, how dare you speak to me?" Oberon ran crying from the set after the outburst, and Wyler insisted Olivier apologize to her, which upset Olivier greatly.Olivier also found himself becoming increasingly annoyed with William Wyler's exhausting and often uncommunicative style of filmmaking. One scene with Olivier was shot 72 times—with each new take called for by Wyler without any actual direction for his actor; just "again!" Finally, an exasperated Olivier is said to have exclaimed "For God's sake, I did it sitting down. I did it with a smile. I did it with a smirk. I did it scratching my ear. I did it with my back to the camera. How do you want me to do it?" Wyler's retort was "I want it better." However, in both his autobiography and his book On Acting, Olivier credits William Wyler with teaching him how to act in films, as opposed to on the stage, and for giving him a new respect for films. Olivier had tended to "ham it up" as if he were playing to the second balcony, but Wyler showed him how to act more subtly - in part by simply wearing him down.In the final sequence of Wuthering Heights, the spirits of Heathcliff and Cathy are seen walking together hand-in-hand, obviously in love. This scene is not found in the book, and according to literary critic John Sutherland, was likely the stark opposite of what Brontë intended the reader to understand. He contends that a contemporary reader would not have seen Cathy's ghost's actions as a gesture of undying love for Heathcliff but one of towering, protective rage; Cathy haunted Heathcliff to death only to prevent him from cheating her daughter out of her inheritance. Director Wyler hated the idea of the after-life scene and didn't want to do it, but producer Samuel Goldwyn vetoed him, and the scene was added after primary filming was complete. As Laurence Olivier and Merle Oberon had moved to other projects, doubles had to be used. Goldwyn subsequently claimed, "I made Wuthering Heights, Wyler only directed it." In fact, Goldwyn's name and producer credit appears last in the opening credits, going against the convention of the director's name appearing last. Goldwyn claimed that Wuthering Heights was his favorite of all his productions. Sutherland writes that this change to the ending has influenced how students view the novel and especially Cathy, who comes across as more passive and accepting of abuse than Brontë may have envisioned.David Niven remembers the filming of Merle Oberon's deathbed scenes (recorded in his bestselling book The Moon's a Balloon) as less than romantic.  After telling Wyler he didn't know how to 'sob', he had been given a menthol mist substance to help it appear as if he were crying, which instead had the effect of making "green goo" come out of his nose. Oberon immediately exited the bed after witnessing it.


== Reception ==


=== Critical reception ===
Frank S. Nugent of The New York Times called it "a strong and somber film, poetically written as the novel not always was, sinister and wild as it was meant to be, far more compact dramatically than Miss Brontë had made it ... It is, unquestionably, one of the most distinguished pictures of the year, one of the finest ever produced by Mr. Goldwyn, and one you should decide to see." Variety wrote that the film "retains all of the grim drama of the book," but believed that its "slow pace" would make for "rather dull material for general audiences." Film Daily reported "Brilliant screen version of Bronte novel ... William Wyler has given the love story warm, sympathetic direction, gaining fine performances from his cast." Harrison's Reports noted "The acting, direction, and production are all excellent; but the story is so sombre and cheerless, that most persons will leave the theatre depressed." John Mosher of The New Yorker wrote: "No screen version of 'Wuthering Heights' could ever touch the heart so closely, I am sure, as does a reading of the printed page; yet the Goldwyn production approximates the quality of the fierce, tempestuous story with a force one might never have expected ... Seldom has the tone of a great novel been so faithfully reproduced by the movie people."Wuthering Heights placed fourth on Film Daily's year-end nationwide poll of 542 critics naming the best films of 1939.American Film Institute included the film as #73 in its AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies and #15 in AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions.


=== Accolades ===


== Miscellaneous ==
The Mitchell Camera Corporation selected cinematographer Gregg Toland and Wuthering Heights to be the first to use their new Mitchell BNC camera. This camera model would become a studio standard for the next half century, and the prototype of Panavision studio cameras of the following decades.
Ronald Colman, Douglas Fairbanks Jr. and Robert Newton were considered for the role of Heathcliff.
The novel takes place in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. However, the film places the action in the mid-19th century, around the time of the novel's publication. Sarah Berry writes that Samuel Goldwyn deliberately chose to do this because he thought "Civil War" fashions were more attractive than Regency fashions. Other writers have claimed that Goldwyn was short on funds and had to recycle costumes from a Civil War drama.
The film is rated G in New Zealand.


== References ==


== External links ==

Wuthering Heights at IMDb 
Wuthering Heights at the TCM Movie Database
Wuthering Heights at AllMovie
Wuthering Heights at the American Film Institute Catalog
Wuthering Heights at Rotten TomatoesStreaming audio

Wuthering Heights on Lux Radio Theater: September 18, 1939
Wuthering Heights on Lux Radio Theater: November 4, 1940
Wuthering Heights on Ford Theater: April 1, 1949
Wuthering Heights on Screen Directors Playhouse: August 9, 195112th Academy Awards
1939 New York Film Critics Circle Awards
7 Faces of Dr. Lao
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Clockwork Orange (film)
A Farewell to Arms (1957 film)
A Flag is Born
A House Divided (1931 film)
A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
A Passage to India (film)
A Song Is Born
A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)
A Thief in Paradise
About.com
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Actress
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay
Academy Award for Best Cinematography
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Production Design
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress
Academy Awards
Actor's and Sin
Actors and Sin
Adaptations of Wuthering Heights
Alexander Korda
Alfred Newman (composer)
Alice Ehlers
AllMovie
All About Eve
All the King's Men (1949 film)
All the President's Men (film)
Amarcord
American Film Institute
American Hustle
Angels Over Broadway
Annie Hall
Anybody Here Seen Kelly?
Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)
Arrowsmith (film)
Arzoo (1950 film)
Ball of Fire
Barbary Coast (film)
Beloved Enemy
Ben-Hur (1959 film)
Ben Hecht
Best Director
Billy Rose's Jumbo (film)
Box Office Mojo
Boyhood (2014 film)
Broadcast News (film)
Brokeback Mountain
Bulldog Drummond (1929 film)
California Lutheran University
Carol (film)
Carrie (1952 film)
Catherine Earnshaw
Catherine Linton
Cecil Humphreys
Cecil Kellaway
Charles MacArthur
China Girl (1942 film)
Circus World (film)
Citizen Kane
Come and Get It (1936 film)
Comrade X
Condemned (1929 film)
Counsellor at Law
Cries and Whispers
Crime Without Passion
Cumbres Borrascosas (1964 TV series)
Cumbres Borrascosas (1976 TV series)
Cumbres Borrascosas (1979 TV series)
Cynara (1932 film)
Cytherea (film)
Daniel Mandell
Darling (1965 film)
David Niven
Day for Night (film)
Dead End (1937 film)
Desert Dust
Design for Living (film)
Detective Story (1951 film)
Dil Diya Dard Liya
Dodsworth (film)
Donald Crisp
Douglas Fairbanks Jr.
Drive My Car (film)
Edgar Linton
Edge of Doom
Emily Brontë
Emily Brontë's Wuthering Heights
Enchantment (1948 film)
Far from Heaven
Fargo (1996 film)
Film Daily
Filmsite.org
First Cow
Five Came Back (TV series)
Five Easy Pieces
Flora Robson
Ford Theater
Frank Nugent
Friendly Persuasion (1956 film)
From Here to Eternity
Funny Girl (film)
Gaily, Gaily
Gandhi (film)
Gentleman's Agreement
Geraldine Fitzgerald
Glamour (1934 film)
Going My Way
Gone with the Wind (film)
Goodfellas
Gregg Toland
Gunga Din (film)
Guys and Dolls (film)
Hallelujah, I'm a Bum (film)
Hannah and Her Sisters
Hans Christian Andersen (film)
Hard Fists
Hareton Earnshaw
Harrison's Reports
Heathcliff (Wuthering Heights)
Heathcliff (musical)
Hell's Heroes (film)
Her First Mate
Her Husband's Affairs
High Noon
Hihintayin Kita sa Langit
Hindley Earnshaw
His Girl Friday
His Supreme Moment
Historical drama
How to Steal a Million
Hugh Williams
Hulchul (1951 film)
Hurlevent
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
I Want You (1951 film)
In Hollywood with Potash and Perlmutter
In Which We Serve
In the Heat of the Night (film)
Isabella Linton
It's a Wonderful World (1939 film)
James Basevi
Jezebel (1938 film)
John Huston
John Mosher (writer)
Jumbo (musical)
Kid Millions
Killers of the Flower Moon (film)
Kiss of Death (1947 film)
Kramer vs. Kramer
L.A. Confidential (film)
La La Land
Ladies and Gentlemen (play)
Lady Bird (film)
Lady of the Tropics
Laurence Olivier
Lazy Lightning
Leaving Las Vegas
Legend of the Lost
Leo G. Carroll
Let Freedom Ring (film)
Library of Congress
List of Wuthering Heights references
Liverpool
Living It Up
Lux Radio Theater
Lydia (film)
Marty (film)
Memphis Belle: A Story of a Flying Fortress
Merle Oberon
Miles Mander
Milk (2008 American film)
Miracle in the Rain
Mitchell Camera
Monkey Business (1952 film)
Mr. Deeds Goes to Town
Mr. Lockwood
Mr Lockwood
Mrs. Miniver
Mulholland Drive (film)
My Fair Lady (film)
My Foolish Heart (1949 film)
My Left Foot
Nana (1934 film)
Nashville (film)
National Board of Review: Top Ten Films
National Board of Review Awards 1939
National Film Preservation Board
National Film Registry
Nelly Dean
New York Film Critics Award
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film
No Country for Old Men
Nothing Sacred (film)
Notorious (1946 film)
On the Waterfront
Once in a Blue Moon (1935 film)
One Heavenly Night
Ordinary People
Our Very Own (1950 film)
Palmy Days
Panavision
Partners Again
Perfect Strangers (1950 film)
Porgy and Bess (film)
Potash and Perlmutter
Prizzi's Honor
Queen of Outer Space
Quiz Show (film)
Raffles (1930 film)
Reds (film)
Rex Downing
Ride the Pink Horse
Roadhouse Nights
Robert Newton
Roma (2018 film)
Roman Holiday
Roman Scandals
Romance film
Ronald Colman
Rose Caylor
Roseanna McCoy
Rotten Tomatoes
Roxie Hart (film)
Samuel Goldwyn
Samuel Goldwyn Productions
Sarita Wooton
Saving Private Ryan
Scarface (1932 film)
Schindler's List
Screen Directors Playhouse
Shoot the Works (film)
Sideways
Slave of Desire
Soak the Rich
Sons and Lovers (film)
Sparkhouse
Specter of the Rose
Spellbound (1945 film)
Splendor (1935 film)
Stella Dallas (1925 film)
Stella Dallas (1937 film)
Straight Shootin'
Street Scene (film)
Strike Me Pink (1936 film)
Terms of Endearment
The Accidental Tourist (film)
The Adventures of Marco Polo
The Apartment
The Artist (film)
The Awakening (1928 film)
The Best Years of Our Lives
The Big Country
The Bishop's Wife
The Black Swan (film)
The Border Cavalier
The Bridge on the River Kwai
The Children's Hour (film)
The Citadel (1938 film)
The Collector (1965 film)
The Cowboy and the Lady (1938 film)
The Dark Angel (1925 film)
The Dark Angel (1935 film)
The Deer Hunter
The Defiant Ones
The Desperate Hours (1955 film)
The Devil Dancer
The Devil to Pay! (film)
The Divorce of Lady X
The Eternal City (1923 film)
The Florentine Dagger
The Front Page
The Gay Deception
The Goldwyn Follies
The Good Fairy (1935 film)
The Grapes of Wrath (film)
The Great Gabbo
The Greeks Had a Word for Them
The Heiress
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1956 film)
The Hurricane (1937 film)
The Hurt Locker
The Indian Fighter
The Informer (1935 film)
The Irishman
The Iron Petticoat
The Kid from Brooklyn
The Kid from Spain
The Letter (1940 film)
The Liberation of L.B. Jones
The Life of Emile Zola
The Lion in Winter (1968 film)
The Little Foxes (film)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
The Lost Weekend (film)
The Love Trap (1929 film)
The Magic Flame
The Masquerader (1933 film)
The Miracle of the Bells
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Night of Love (1927 film)
The North Star (1943 film)
The Pest (1919 film)
The Player (1992 film)
The Pride of the Yankees
The Princess and the Pirate
The Promise (2007 film)
The Real Glory
The Rescue (1929 film)
The Scoundrel (1935 film)
The Secret Life of Walter Mitty (1947 film)
The Shakedown (1929 film)
The Silence of the Lambs (film)
The Social Network
The Stolen Ranch
The Storm (1930 film)
The Sun Also Rises (1957 film)
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)
The Unholy Garden
The Unholy Night
The Wedding Night
The Westerner (1940 film)
The Winning of Barbara Worth
The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)
These Three
They Got Me Covered
They Shall Have Music
This Is Heaven
Thousand Oaks, California
Thunder Riders (film)
Thunderbolt (1947 film)
Tom Brown of Culver
Tom Jones (1963 film)
Tonight or Never (1931 film)
Top Withens
Topaze (1933 American film)
Topsy-Turvy
Traffic (2000 film)
Turn Back the Clock (film)
Turner Classic Movies
Twentieth Century (film)
Twentieth Century (play)
Two Lovers (1928 film)
Tár
Ulysses (1954 film)
Underworld (1927 film)
United 93 (film)
United Artists
Up in Arms
Variety (magazine)
Vernon Downing
Viva Villa!
Vivien Leigh
Walang Hanggan (2012 TV series)
Watch on the Rhine
We Live Again
West Side Story (1961 film)
Where the Sidewalk Ends (film)
Whirlpool (1949 film)
Whoopee! (film)
Wildwood Regional Park
William Wyler
Willys Theatre Presenting Ben Hecht's Tales of the City
Woman Chases Man
Wonder Man (film)
Wuthering Heights
Wuthering Heights (1920 film)
Wuthering Heights (1948 TV play)
Wuthering Heights (1953 TV play)
Wuthering Heights (1954 film)
Wuthering Heights (1959 film)
Wuthering Heights (1967 TV series)
Wuthering Heights (1970 film)
Wuthering Heights (1978 TV serial)
Wuthering Heights (1988 film)
Wuthering Heights (1998 film)
Wuthering Heights (2003 film)
Wuthering Heights (2009 TV serial)
Wuthering Heights (2011 film)
Wuthering Heights (Floyd opera)
Wuthering Heights (Herrmann)
Wuthering Heights (fictional location)
Wuthering Heights (musical)
Wuthering Heights (song)
Wuthering High School
Z (1969 film)
Zero Dark Thirty
http://www.filmsite.org/wuth.html
http://bipolar.about.com/cs/celebs/a/vivienleigh.htm
https://archive.org/stream/variety133-1939-03#page/n253/mode/2up
https://archive.org/stream/filmdaily75wids#page/n675/mode/2up
https://archive.org/stream/harrisonsreports21harr#page/n69/mode/2up
https://archive.org/stream/filmdaily77wids#page/n79/mode/2up
https://movies.nytimes.com/movie/55636/Wuthering-Heights/awards
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9D00E7DA103CE73ABC4C52DFB2668382629EDE
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v55636
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4136058-8
https://archive.org/download/Lux04/Lux_39-09-18_Wuthering_Heights.mp3
https://archive.org/download/Lux05/Lux_40-11-04_Wuthering_Heights.mp3
https://archive.org/download/FordTheater/FT_49-04-01_ep65-Wuthering_Heights.mp3
https://archive.org/download/ScreenDirectorsPlayhouse/SDP_51-08-09_ep115-Wuthering_Heights.mp3
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0032145/
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/8187
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/1024192-wuthering_heights
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14665726t
https://viaf.org/viaf/186827202
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb14665726t
https://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=wutheringheights89.htm
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1140611#identifiers
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/96324/enwp
https://web.archive.org/web/20090123080716/http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/55636/Wuthering-Heights/awards
https://culturevulture.net/film/wuthering-heights/
https://id.loc.gov/authorities/no2006005408
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1140611#P345
