Yankee Doodle Dandy
Yankee Doodle Dandy is a 1942 American biographical musical film about George M. Cohan, known as "The Man Who Owned Broadway". It stars James Cagney, Joan Leslie, Walter Huston, and Richard Whorf, and features Irene Manning, George Tobias, Rosemary DeCamp, Jeanne Cagney, and Vera Lewis. Joan Leslie's singing voice was partially dubbed by Sally Sweetland.
The film was written by Robert Buckner and Edmund Joseph, and directed by Michael Curtiz.  According to the special edition DVD, significant and uncredited improvements were made to the script by the twin brothers Julius J. Epstein and Philip G. Epstein. The film was a major hit for Warner Brothers, and was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, winning three.
In 1993, Yankee Doodle Dandy  was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant", and in 1998, the film was included on the American Film Institute's 100 Years...100 Movies list, a compilation of the 100 greatest films in American cinema.


== Plot ==
In the early days of World War II, George M. Cohan comes out of retirement to star as President Roosevelt in the Rodgers and Hart musical I'd Rather Be Right. On the show's first night, he is summoned to the White House to meet the president, who presents him with a Congressional Gold Medal (although the Cohan character on screen incorrectly identifies the award as the Congressional Medal of Honor). Cohan is overcome and chats with Roosevelt, recalling his early days on the stage. The film flashes back to his supposed birth on July 4, whilst his father is performing on the vaudeville stage.
Cohan and his sister join the family act as soon as they learn to dance, and soon The Four Cohans are performing successfully. But George gets too cocky as he grows up and is blacklisted by theatrical producers for being troublesome. He leaves the act and hawks his songs unsuccessfully to producers. In partnership with Sam Harris, another struggling writer, he finally interests a producer and they are on the road to success. He also marries Mary, a young singer/dancer.
As his star ascends, he persuades his now struggling parents to join his act, eventually vesting some of his valuable theatrical properties in their name.
Cohan retires, but returns to the stage several times, culminating in the role of the U.S. president. As he leaves the White House, after receiving the Congressional Gold Medal from the president, he descends a set of stairs while performing a tap dance (which Cagney thought up before the scene was filmed and undertook without rehearsal). Outside, he joins a military parade, where the soldiers are singing "Over There", and, at first, he isn't singing. Not knowing that Cohan is the song's composer, one of them asks if he knows the words. Cohan's response is a smile before joining in.


== Cast ==

Cast notes:

In his role as adviser to the film, George M. Cohan, who admired Fred Astaire's work, let it be known that he preferred Astaire, who also bore a passing resemblance to him, to star in his life story. Warners offered the role to Astaire first, but he turned it down because Cohan's eccentric, stiff-legged dancing was far removed from Astaire's own, more fluid, style.
James Cagney reprised the role of George M. Cohan in the movie The Seven Little Foys (1955), but only on the condition that he receive no money: He did the film as a tribute to Eddie Foy.  In Yankee Doodle Dandy, Eddie Foy, Jr. played the role of his own father.  In The Seven Little Foys, Bob Hope portrayed Foy; Charley Foy (brother of Eddie Foy, Jr.) served as a narrator.
Actress Jeanne Cagney, who played the part of Cohan's sister, was James Cagney's real-life sister. Cagney's brother, William Cagney, was the Associate Producer of the film.
Rosemary DeCamp, who played the mother of George M. Cohan, was, in fact, 11 years younger than Cagney.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt was played by Captain Jack Young, a lookalike who is seen only from the back. An impressionist, Art Gilmore, provided the voice of Roosevelt, uncredited. Gilmore would narrate the Joe McDoakes film shorts produced by Warners, and became a well-known announcer on television through the 1970s.
Uncredited cast members include Eddie Acuff, Murray Alper, Ward Bond, Walter Brooke, Georgia Carroll, Glen Cavender, Spencer Charters, Wallis Clark, William B. Davidson, Ann Doran, Tom Dugan, Bill Edwards, Frank Faylen, Pat Flaherty, James Flavin, William Forrest, William Gillespie, Joe Gray, Creighton Hale, John Hamilton, Harry Hayden, Stuart Holmes, William Hopper, Eddie Kane, Fred Kelsey, Vera Lewis, Audrey Long, Hank Mann, Frank Mayo, Lon McCallister, Edward McWade, George Meeker, Dolores Moran, Charles Morton, Jack Mower, Paul Panzer, Francis Pierlot, Clinton Rosemond, Syd Saylor, Frank Sully, Dick Wessel, Leo White, Mickey Daniels and Dave Willock.


== Background and production ==
Cagney, like Cohan, was an Irish-American who had been a song-and-dance man early in his career. His unique and seemingly odd presentation style, of half-singing and half-reciting the songs, reflected the style that Cohan himself used.  His natural dance style and physique were also a good match for Cohan. Newspapers at the time reported that Cagney intended to consciously imitate Cohan's song-and-dance style, but to play the normal part of the acting in his own style. Although director Curtiz was known as a taskmaster, he also gave his actors some latitude. Cagney and other players came up with a number of "bits of business", as Cagney called them, meaning improvised lines or action in theater parlance.A number of the biographical particulars of the movie are Hollywood-ized fiction, such as omitting the fact that Cohan divorced and remarried, combining Cohan's two wives, Ethel and Agnes, into a single character named Mary, and taking some liberties with the chronology of Cohan's life and the order of his parents' deaths. In one scene, after Cohan suffers a flop with an atypical non-musical drama, Popularity, he composes a telegram apologizing to the public. He then walks out of the Western Union office to find newspaper sellers announcing the torpedoing of the Lusitania. In reality, the failed play was staged in 1906, and the Lusitania's sinking occurred in 1915.Nevertheless, care was taken to make the sets, costumes, and dance steps match the original stage presentations. Twice, Cagney sprained an ankle while mastering Cohan's stiff-legged dance style. This effort was aided significantly by a former associate of Cohan's, Jack Boyle, who knew the original productions well. Boyle also appeared in the film in some of the dancing groups.
Cagney, as Cohan, is shown performing as a singing and dancing version of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Although it was well known, the reality of Roosevelt's use of a wheelchair after a paralytic illness was not emphasized at the time. In the film, Roosevelt never leaves his chair when meeting Cohan.
Cohan himself served as a consultant during the production of the film, as well as being credited with the incidental score. Due to his failing health, his actual involvement in the film was limited. But when completed, the film was privately screened for Cohan and he commented on Cagney's performance: "My God, what an act to follow!"Because of Cohan's failing health, Warner Brothers moved up the scheduled gala premiere from July 4 to May 29; the original date had been chosen because of the film's patriotic theme and because in the movie, Cohan is said to have been born on the Fourth of July, as he wrote in the lyrics of his song, "Yankee Doodle Dandy". (However, Cohan was actually born on July 3.)  In the end, Cohan lived for several more months after the film's release.
The movie poster for this film was the first ever produced by noted poster designer Bill Gold.


== Musical numbers ==
"Overture" – Played by Orchestra behind titles.
"Keep Your Eyes Upon Me (The Dancing Master)" – Sung and Danced by Walter Huston, then Sung and Danced by Henry Blair.
"While Strolling Through the Park One Day" – Sung and Danced by Jo Ann Marlowe.
"At a Georgia Camp Meeting" – Danced by James Cagney, Walter Huston, Rosemary DeCamp and Jeanne Cagney.
"I Was Born in Virginia" – Sung and Danced by James Cagney, Jeanne Cagney, Walter Huston and Rosemary DeCamp.
"The Warmest Baby in the Bunch" – Sung and Danced by Joan Leslie (dubbed by Sally Sweetland).
"Harrigan" – Sung and Danced by James Cagney and Joan Leslie.
"The Yankee Doodle Boy" – Sung and Danced by James Cagney, Joan Leslie (dubbed by Sally Sweetland) and Chorus.
"Give My Regards to Broadway" – Sung and Danced by James Cagney and Chorus.
"Oh You Wonderful Girl / Blue Skies, Gray Skies / The Belle of the Barbers' Ball" – Sung by James Cagney, Jeanne Cagney, Walter Huston and Rosemary DeCamp.
"Mary's a Grand Old Name" – Sung by Joan Leslie (dubbed by Sally Sweetland).
"Forty-Five Minutes from Broadway" – Sung by James Cagney.
"Mary's a Grand Old Name" (reprise 1) – Sung by Joan Leslie (dubbed by Sally Sweetland).
"Mary's a Grand Old Name" (reprise 2) – Sung by Irene Manning.
"Forty-Five Minutes from Broadway" (reprise) – Sung by Chorus.
"So Long, Mary" – Sung by Irene Manning and Chorus.
"You're a Grand Old Flag" – Performed by James Cagney and Chorus.
"Like the Wandering Minstrel" – Sung by James Cagney and Chorus.
"Over There" – Sung by Frances Langford, James Cagney and Chorus.
"A George M. Cohan Potpouri" – Sung by Frances Langford.
"Off the Record" – Performed by James Cagney.
"Over There" (reprise) – Sung by James Cagney and Chorus.
"The Yankee Doodle Boy" (reprise) – Played by Orchestra behind end credits.


== Production ==
Cagney had initially been opposed to a biopic of George M. Cohan's life, having disliked Cohan since the Actors' Equity Strike in 1919, in which he sided with the producers. In 1940, Cagney was named, along with 15 other Hollywood figures, in the grand jury testimony of John R. Leech, the self-described 'chief functionary' of the Los Angeles Communist Party who had been subpoenaed by the House Committee on Un-American Activities. The New York Times printed the allegation that Cagney was a communist on its front page. Cagney refuted the accusation and Martin Dies, Jr. made a statement to the press clearing Cagney. William Cagney, one of the film's producers, is reported to have said to his brother that "we're going to have to make the goddamndest patriotic picture that's ever been made. I think it's the Cohan story".


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The film nearly doubled the earnings of Captains of the Clouds (1942), Cagney's previous effort, bringing in more than $6 million in rentals to Warner Bros.According to Warner Bros records the film earned $4,631,000 domestically and $1,892,000 foreign.This made it the biggest box-office success in the company's history up to that time. The star earned his contractual $150,000 salary and nearly half a million dollars in profit sharing. According to Variety, the film earned $4.8 million in theatrical rentals through its North American release.


=== Critical response ===
Contemporary reviews were highly positive. Bosley Crowther of The New York Times said that film patrons would do well to see it, for "you will find as warm and delightful a musical picture as has hit the screen in years, a corking good entertainment and as affectionate, if not as accurate, a film biography as has ever—yes, ever—been made ... there is so much in this picture and so many persons that deserve their meed of praise that every one connected with it can stick a feather in his hat and take our word—it's dandy!" Variety called the film "as entertaining as any top filmusical ever made ... James Cagney does a Cohan of which the original George M. might well be proud." Harrison's Reports wrote: "Excellent! Audiences should find this musical comedy, which is based on the life of George M. Cohan, one of the most sparkling and delightful musical pictures that have ever been brought to the screen. Much of its entertainment value is due to the exceptionally fine performance of James Cagney, whose impersonation of Mr. Cohan is uncanny—his gestures, his talk, and his dancing, are done to perfection." John Mosher of The New Yorker called the film "a complete delight, an extravaganza of tunes the country has liked for decades," although he considered it "dubious" as a biography of Cohan.Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 90% of 29 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.9/10. The site's critics consensus reads: "James Cagney deploys his musical gifts to galvanizing effect in Yankee Doodle Dandy, a celebration of patriotic fervor as much as it is a biopic of George M. Cohan." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 89 out of 100, based on 10 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".


=== Awards and honors ===
The film won Academy Awards for Best Actor in a Leading Role (James Cagney), Best Music, Scoring of a Musical Picture (Ray Heindorf and Heinz Roemheld), and Best Sound Recording (Nathan Levinson). It was nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Walter Huston), Best Director, Best Film Editing for George Amy, Best Picture and Best Writing, Original Story. In 1993, Yankee Doodle Dandy  was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
American Film Institute recognition

1998: AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies – #100
2004: AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs – #71
The Yankee Doodle Boy
2005: AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
"My mother thanks you. My father thanks you. My sister thanks you. And I thank you." – #97
2006: AFI's 100 Years of Musicals – #18
2006: AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers – #88
2007: AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – #98


== Adaptations ==
Yankee Doodle Dandy was adapted as a radio play on the October 19, 1942 broadcast of The Screen Guild Theater, starring James Cagney with Rita Hayworth and Betty Grable.
George M! is a stage musical, also based on the life of George M. Cohan, opening on Broadway in 1968.


== See also ==
Yankee Doodle Daffy, a 1943 animated short film starting Daffy Duck and Porky Pig.


== References ==


== External links ==

Yankee Doodle Dandy at IMDb 
Yankee Doodle Dandy at the TCM Movie Database
Yankee Doodle Dandy at AllMovie
Yankee Doodle Dandy at the American Film Institute Catalog
Yankee Doodle Dandy at Rotten Tomatoes1919 Actors' Equity Association strike
20,000 Years in Sing Sing
99-es számú bérkocsi
A. L. Erlanger
AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies
AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)
AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs
AFI's 100 Years of Musicals
AFI Catalog of Feature Films
A Breath of Scandal
A Deadly Game (1924 film)
A Million Bid (1927 film)
A Penny's History
A Soldier's Plaything
A skorpió I.
Abel Green
Academy Award for Best Actor
Academy Award for Best Director
Academy Award for Best Film Editing
Academy Award for Best Original Score
Academy Award for Best Picture
Academy Award for Best Sound
Academy Award for Best Story
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Academy Awards
Al Smith
Alias the Doctor
AllMovie
Alraune (1918 film)
American Film Institute
Angels with Dirty Faces
Ann Doran
Art Gilmore
Audrey Long
Avalanche (1923 film)
Betty Grable
Bill Edwards (actor)
Bill Gold
Biographical film
Black Fury (film)
Bob Hope
Boccaccio (1920 film)
Bosley Crowther
Bright Leaf
Bright Lights (1930 film)
Bright Lights (1935 film)
British Agent
Bánk Bán (film)
Cab No. 13
Captain Blood (1935 film)
Captains of the Clouds
Captive Souls
Casablanca (film)
Charles Morton (actor)
Chester Clute
Clinton Rosemond
Congressional Gold Medal
Congressional Medal of Honor
Creighton Hale
Daffy Duck
Das Spielzeug von Paris
Daughters Courageous
Dave Willock
Demon of the Sea
Dick Wessel
Dive Bomber (film)
Doctor X (film)
Dodge City (film)
Dolores Moran
Douglas Croft
Earth's Man
Eddie Acuff
Eddie Foy
Eddie Foy, Jr.
Eddie Kane
Edward Franklin Albee II
Edward McWade
Fandom, Inc.
Fay Templeton
Female (1933 film)
Flamingo Road (film)
Force of Arms
Forty-Five Minutes from Broadway
Four's a Crowd
Four Daughters
Four Wives
Frances Langford
Francis Pierlot
Francis of Assisi (film)
Frank Faylen
Frank Mayo (actor)
Frank Sully
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Fred Astaire
Fred Kelsey
Front Page Woman
General Babka (1924 film)
George Amy
George Barbier (actor)
George M!
George M. Cohan
George Meeker
George Tobias
Georgia Carroll
Give My Regards to Broadway
Glad Rag Doll (film)
Glen Cavender
God's Gift to Women
Gold Is Where You Find It
Golddigger (film)
Good Time Charley
Good and Evil (film)
Goodbye Again (1933 film)
Gross rental
Hal B. Wallis
Hank Mann
Harrigan (song)
Harrison's Reports
Harry Hayden
Harun al Raschid (film)
Hearts in Exile (1929 film)
Heinz Roemheld
Hollywood (film industry)
House Committee on Un-American Activities
I'd Rather Be Right
I'll See You in My Dreams (1951 film)
IMDb (identifier)
ISBN (identifier)
Internet Broadway Database
Irene Manning
Irish-American
Jack L. Warner
Jack Mower
James Cagney
James Flavin
James Wong Howe
Janie (1944 film)
Jean the Tenant
Jeanne Cagney
Jim Thorpe – All-American
Jimmy the Gent (film)
Joan Leslie
Joe McDoakes
John Hamilton (actor)
John Mosher (writer)
Julius J. Epstein
Jön az öcsém
Júdás
Kid Galahad (1937 film)
King Creole
Labyrinth of Horror
Leo White
Library of Congress
Life with Father (film)
Liliom (1919 film)
Little Big Shot (1935 film)
Little Johnny Jones
Lon McCallister
Lu, the Coquette
Lulu (1918 film)
Madonna of Avenue A
Magic Waltz
Mammy (1930 film)
Mandalay (film)
Mark Hellinger Theatre
Martin Dies, Jr.
Mary's a Grand Old Name
Master Zoard
Metacritic
Michael Curtiz
Michael Curtiz filmography
Mickey Daniels
Mildred Pierce (film)
Minor Watson
Mission to Moscow
Mountain Justice (1937 film)
Movie poster
Mr. Doctor (film)
Mrs. Dane's Confession
Mrs. Tutti Frutti
Murray Alper
Musical film
My Dream Is Yours
My Husband's Getting Married
Mystery of the Wax Museum
Nameless (1923 film)
Nathan Levinson
National Film Registry
New York City
Newspapers.com
Night and Day (1946 film)
Noah's Ark (1928 film)
Nobody's Son (film)
Nora Bayes
Odette Myrtil
Open access
Over There
Passage to Marseille
Pat Flaherty (actor)
Patsy Lee Parsons
Paul Panzer
Peace's Road
Philip G. Epstein
Porky Pig
President Franklin D. Roosevelt
President of the United States
Prisoner of the Night (film)
Private Detective 62
Ray Heindorf
Richard Whorf
Rita Hayworth
River's End (1930 film)
Robert Buckner
Rodgers and Hart
Romance on the High Seas
Rosemary DeCamp
Rotten Tomatoes
Roughly Speaking (film)
S. Z. Sakall
Sally Sweetland
Sam H. Harris
Santa Fe Trail (film)
Secret of St. Job Forest
Seven of Spades (film)
Sinking of the RMS Lusitania
Sodom and Gomorrah (1922 film)
Sons of Liberty (film)
Spencer Charters
Spring in Winter
Stolen Holiday
Stuart Holmes
Syd Saylor
Tartar Invasion
Tenderloin (film)
The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1960 film)
The Adventures of Robin Hood
The Best Things in Life Are Free (film)
The Black Rainbow
The Borrowed Babies
The Boy from Oklahoma
The Breaking Point (1950 film)
The Cabin in the Cotton
The Case of the Curious Bride
The Charge of the Light Brigade (1936 film)
The Charlatan (1917 film)
The Colonel (1918 film)
The Comancheros (film)
The Desired Woman
The Devil (1918 Hungarian film)
The Egyptian (film)
The Exile (1914 film)
The Fishing Bell
The Gamblers (1929 film)
The Golden Butterfly
The Hangman (1959 film)
The Helen Morgan Story
The Jazz Singer (1952 film)
The Karthauzer
The Kennel Murder Case (film)
The Key (1934 film)
The Keyhole (1933 film)
The Lady Takes a Sailor
The Lady with the Black Gloves
The Last Bohemian (1912 film)
The Last Dawn
The Mad Genius
The Man in the Net
The Matrimonial Bed
The Medic (1916 film)
The Merry Widow (1918 film)
The Moon of Israel
The New York Times
The New Yorker
The Perfect Specimen
The Princess in a Nightrobe
The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex
The Proud Rebel
The Red Samson
The Scarlet Hour
The Scourge of God (film)
The Screen Guild Theater
The Sea Hawk (1940 film)
The Sea Wolf (1941 film)
The Seven Little Foys
The Star of Damascus
The Story of Will Rogers
The Strange Love of Molly Louvain
The Strength of the Fatherland
The Sunflower Woman
The Third Degree (1926 film)
The Ugly Boy
The Unsuspected
The Vagabond King (1956 film)
The Walking Dead (1936 film)
The Wolf (1916 film)
The Woman from Monte Carlo
The Yankee Doodle Boy
This Is the Army
Today and Tomorrow (1912 film)
Tom Dugan (actor, born 1889)
Trouble Along the Way
Turner Classic Movies
Under a Texas Moon
Variety (magazine)
Vaudeville
Vera Lewis
Virginia City (film)
Wallis Clark
Walter Brooke
Walter Catlett
Walter Huston
War bond
Ward Bond
Warner Bros.
Warner Brothers
We're No Angels (1955 film)
Western Union
While Strolling Through the Park One Day
White Christmas (film)
White House
William B. Davidson
William Cagney
William Forrest (actor)
William Gillespie (actor)
William Hopper
World War II
Yankee Doodle
Yankee Doodle Daffy
You're a Grand Old Flag
Young Man with a Horn (film)
Young Medardus
http://www.cengage.com/resource_uploads/static_resources/0495898074/24712/learning_lingo.html
http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1943
http://www.classicfilmboy.com/2013/04/james-cagney-blogathon-yankee-doodle.html
https://archive.org/stream/variety149-1943-01#page/n57/mode/1up
https://www.newspapers.com/clip/2520911/harrisburg_telegraph/
https://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9406E2D7133CE33BBC4850DFB3668389659EDE
https://www.allmovie.com/movie/v55692
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0035575/
https://viaf.org/viaf/219969592
https://d-nb.info/gnd/4653647-4
https://www.ibdb.com/broadway-show/5456
https://www.ibdb.com/broadway-cast-staff/5829
https://catalog.afi.com/Catalog/moviedetails/27569
https://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb142950004
https://www.ibdb.com/broadway-cast-staff/george-m-cohan-5829
https://data.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cb142950004
https://variety.com/1942/film/reviews/yankee-doodle-dandy-1200413939/
https://archive.org/details/cityboyscagneybo0000skla/page/130
https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/yankee_doodle_dandy
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1321622#identifiers
https://www.metacritic.com/movie/yankee-doodle-dandy
https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-yankee-doodle-dandy-1942
http://uli.nli.org.il/F/?func=find-b&local_base=NLX10&find_code=UID&request=987007372051605171
https://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title/2191/enwp
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1321622#P345
