One Hour with You is a 1932 American pre-Code musical comedy film about a married couple who are attracted to other people. It was produced and directed by Ernst Lubitsch "with the assistance of" George Cukor, and written by Samson Raphaelson from the play Only a Dream by Lothar Schmidt. It stars Maurice Chevalier, Jeanette MacDonald, Genevieve Tobin, Charlie Ruggles and Roland Young. A French-language version titled Une heure près de toi was produced simultaneously, with Lili Damita playing Tobin's role.
The film is a musical remake of The Marriage Circle (1924), the second film that Lubitsch directed in the United States. One Hour with You was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture.
The film was preserved by the UCLA Film and Television Archive with its original color tints restored.


== Plot ==
Parisian doctor Andre Bertier is faithful to his loving wife Colette, much to the surprise of his lovely female patients. But when Colette's best friend Mitzi Olivier insists upon being treated by Dr. Bertier, his devotion is put to the test.


== Cast ==
Maurice Chevalier as Dr. Andre Bertier
Jeanette MacDonald as Colette Bertier
Genevieve Tobin as Mitzi Olivier
Charles Ruggles as Adolph
Roland Young as Professor Olivier
Josephine Dunn as Mademoiselle Martel
Richard Carle as Henri Dornier, Private Detective
Barbara Leonard as Mitzi's Maid
George Barbier as Police Commissioner
Donald Novis as Crooner
Charles Coleman as Marcel (uncredited)
Kent Taylor as Party Guest (uncredited)Carole Lombard and Kay Francis were the first choices to costar in the film.


== Soundtrack ==
Unless otherwise noted, the music is written by Oscar Straus and the lyrics are written by Leo Robin.

"One Hour with You", music by Richard A. Whiting, performed by the Coconut Orchestra with vocal by Donald Novis, also sung by Genevieve Tobin and Maurice Chevalier, Charlie Ruggles and Jeanette MacDonald, and Chevalier and MacDonald
"Police Station Number" (uncredited), music by John Leipold
"We Will Always Be Sweethearts", sung by MacDonald
"What Would You Do?", sung by Chevalier
"Oh That Mitzi", sung by Chevalier
"Three Times a Day", sung by Tobin
"What a Little Thing Like a Wedding Ring Can Do", sung by Chevalier and MacDonald
"It Was Only a Dream Kiss", sung by Chevalier and MacDonald


== Production ==
Lubitsch was originally scheduled to direct One Hour with You and supervised the project in preproduction, but was unable to direct because his previous film, The Man I Killed, went beyond schedule. George Cukor was instead assigned to direct. Within two weeks after filming had begun, conflicts between Chevalier and Cukor brought Lubitsch back, although Cukor remained on the set. Cukor and Lubitsch each demanded sole credit for directing and the matter was litigated in court. Before a judgment was rendered, Cukor received a credit for assisting the direction and the right to break his contract with Paramount in order to direct What Price Hollywood? at RKO.


== References ==
Notes


== External links ==
One Hour with You at Jeanette MacDonald and Nelson Eddy fansite
https://archive.org/details/one.-hour.with.-you.-1932.720p.-blu-ray.x-264-x-0r
essay by Michael Koresky Criterion CollectionMetadata

One Hour with You at the American Film Institute Catalog
One Hour with You at the TCM Movie Database
One Hour with You at AllMovie
One Hour With You at Rotten Tomatoes
One Hour with You at IMDb 
various One Hour with You reviews IMDb